
--- PAGE 1 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                             T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
Z                                                                                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                YABANCI     DİL  BİLGİSİ          
                                                SEVİYE   TESPİT    SINAVI         
                                                                                  
                                                                   (YDS)          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                            İNGİLİZCE             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                           (İlkbahar Dönemi)      
                                                                                  
                                                           1 NİSAN   2018         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi,
     fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve
     testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır.        
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 3 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English     TEST OF ENGLISH                               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      This test consists of 80 questions.                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or                       
                                            4. Architectural analysis is not only a ---- academic
         expression to fill the space.                                            
                                              pursuit, done for its own sake, but it can be
                                              informative and entertaining as well.
                                              A)mutually      B)convincingly      
       1. Gender studies is a multifaceted field of inquiry into                  
        social structures and social relations that has                           
                                              C)drastically   D)purely            
        important ---- for the study of violence, peace and                       
        conflict.                                                                 
                                                       E)deniably                 
        A)challenges     B)divisions                                              
        C)implications   D)drawbacks                                              
                 E)requirements                                                   
                                            5. Childcare is a broad term that ---- services which
                                              protect the health, safety, and well-being of children
                                              who require custodial care by adults other than their
                                              own parents for a temporary period of time.
                                              A)hinders       B)encompasses       
       2. Nano-tech products can potentially save lives as                        
        well as give us hundreds of new conveniences from                         
                                              C)creates       D)eliminates        
        enhanced drug delivery and disease ---- to fabric                         
        that will not stain.                                                      
                                                       E)suspends                 
        A)progression    B)manipulation                                           
        C)detection      D)transmission                                           
                 E)inheritance                                                    
                                            6. Taking a break, and distracting your mind for a
                                              while, not only gives you the spare time to be
                                              creative, but it can also give your brain the space it
                                              needs to ---- creative solutions to problems you
                                              have been struggling with.          
       3. The thin, invisible layer of gas surrounding the                        
                                              A)make up for   B)get away from     
        Earth, which is called the atmosphere, shields us                         
        from the vacuum of space and protects us from ----                        
                                              C)fight back against D)look up to   
        solar radiation.                                                          
        A)delicate       B)excessive                                              
                                                       E)come up with             
        C)vigorous       D)elaborate                                              
                 E)swift                                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         1                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 4 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          7-16: For these questions, choose the best                              
                                             9. By 2.5 million years ago, when they began ---- stone
         word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s).                           
                                              tools, early humans had understood that they ---- the
                                              natural world to their own advantage.
                                              A) to have made / had to alter      
       7. A number of studies have concluded that a given                         
        level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere ---- less                       
                                              B) to make / used to alter          
        warming than previously ----.                                             
        A) is producing / to think            C)making / could alter              
        B) has produced / thinking            D)having made / should have altered 
        C)produces / thought                  E) to have been making / must have altered
        D)has been producing / having thought                                     
        E) had produced / being thought                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                            10. Dramatists and scriptwriters could place their
                                              characters ---- the centre of a terrifying human
                                              conflict, and may allow us to watch these characters
                                              suffer the pains of avoiding a collision ---- the
                                              conflict.                           
       8. Anyone who ---- unusual reactions to antihistamines                     
                                              A)on / for B)over / in C)at / with  
        (medicines that relieve or prevent the symptoms of                        
        some kinds of allergy) in the recent past ---- his or                     
                                                   D)to / about E)by / from       
        her physician know before taking the drugs again.                         
        A) used to have / might let                                               
        B) had had / must have let                                                
        C)was having / could let                                                  
        D)has had / should let                                                    
                                            11. ---- the problems of obesity and disordered eating
                                              growing around the world, public health
        E) had / might have let                                                   
                                              professionals have focused research efforts on
                                              identifying potential causes and treatments ----
                                              these related problems.             
                                              A)About / in     B)On / towards     
                                              C)With / for     D)Through / from   
                                                       E)Among / at               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         2                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 5 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      12. ---- there is no consensus among folklorists on how 15. In statistics, ---- the standard deviation allows us to
        to define folklore nor how to explain the issues of see how much individuals vary within a sample, ----
        the meaning and the function of it, folklore generally the standard error allows us to estimate how much
        refers to cultural expressions, such as narratives, samples will vary within a population.
        music, dance, beliefs and festivals.                                      
                                              A)whether / or   B)no sooner / than 
        A)Once     B)While    C)Until                                             
                                              C)rather / than  D)hardly / when    
             D)As         E)In case                                               
                                                       E)just as / so             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      13. Industrial nations consume nearly 75 to 80 percent                      
        of the fossil fuels burned each year; ----, they are 16. The idea of the Internet was initially to provide
        responsible for the majority of greenhouse gas redundancy of communications ---- a catastrophic
        emissions.                            event like a nuclear blast, which might destroy a
                                              single connection or computer but not the entire
        A)instead        B)on the contrary                                        
                                              network.                            
        C)as a result    D)for example        A)such as        B)on behalf of     
                 E)however                    C)in terms of    D)in addition to   
                                                       E)in case of               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      14. Buildings such as the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul,                         
        Turkey date back to the sixth century and yet are                         
        still standing ---- they are located in                                   
        earthquake-prone areas.                                                   
        A)as long as     B)unless                                                 
        C)as if          D)although                                               
                                                                                  
                 E)since                                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         3                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 6 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
          17-21: For these questions, choose the best                             
          word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19.                        
          passage.                                                                
                                              A)regardless of  B)rather than      
        Fossil fuel use is one of the main causes of climate C)as opposed to D)due to
        change and the greenhouse effect. (17)----, we must                       
        significantly reduce carbon dioxide emissions from E)in spite of          
        activities like heating and transportation. One option                    
        would be to (18)---- to renewable energy sources                          
        wherever possible,such as solar, hydropower, wind or                      
        geothermal systems. Another important step isto                           
        reduceour individual energy footprint. For example,                       
        driving a car places a particularly high burden on the                    
        environment (19)---- the carbon dioxide emissions into                    
        the air. Yet, we should keep in mind that there are                       
        several ways to lessen the impact and still continue 20.                  
        (20)---- cars.For instance, by choosing (21)---- many new A)to have used B)being used
        energy-saving models, we can help reduce harmful                          
        emissions.                            C)using          D)to be used       
                                                       E)having used              
                                                                                  
      17.                                                                         
        A)Conversely     B)Similarly                                              
                                                                                  
        C)Otherwise      D)However          21.                                   
                                              A)from           B)onto             
                 E)Therefore                                                      
                                              C)at             D)towards          
                                                                                  
                                                       E)over                     
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      18.                                                                         
        A)confine        B)object                                                 
                                                                                  
        C)switch         D)accommodate                                            
                 E)respond                                                        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         4                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 7 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
          22-26: For these questions, choose the best                             
          word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24.                        
          passage.                                                                
                                              A)coincidentally B)vaguely          
        When fighting fat, and trying to eat healthily, changing C)truly D)partially
        your eating environment is easier than changing your                      
        mind. A research team in the US has set about  E)seemingly                
        uncovering the hidden persuaders in our homes that                        
        trick us (22)----overeating – things like serving spoons,                 
        cupboards and colours. But most of these tempters can                     
        also be reversed to make us slimmer and healthier.                        
        (23)---- there are many solutions to mindless eating,                     
        most of them will go undiscovered because if we have a                    
        problem with our diet, we tend to focus on food itself,                   
        not on our surroundings. All that requires willpower,                     
        which is hard work and has to last a lifetime to be 25.                   
        (24)---- successful. Research has found subtle ways to                    
                                              A)due to         B)instead of       
        change our homes, workplaces, schools, or modify our                      
        approach to restaurant dining and grocery shopping, so                    
                                              C)with regard to D)in terms of      
        we mindlessly eat less (25)---- e ating more. If we want to               
        automatically eat better, we do not need to change our                    
                                                       E)together with            
        minds, we (26)---- our surroundings.                                      
      22.                                                                         
                                            26.                                   
        A)against  B)into     C)without                                           
                                              A)have to optimise B)must have optimised
             D)behind     E)off                                                   
                                              C)may have optimised D)could have optimised
                                                       E)would optimise           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      23.                                                                         
        A)Given that B)Just as C)Before                                           
             D)Unless     E)Although                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         5                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 8 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          27-36: For these questions, choose the best                             
                                            29. Although alchemy began as a way to turn other
         option to complete the given sentence.                                   
                                              metals into gold, ----.             
                                              A) it matured into a system of thinking about nature that
                                                contributed to the development of modern chemistry
      27. Because of its power and potential for both harm                        
        and good, ----.                                                           
                                              B) alchemistic ideas and practices flourished in the
        A) modern meteorology has made notable improvements ancient world within several cultural traditions
          in the critical discipline of predicting severe weather                 
                                              C)a number of spectacular failures eventually led to the
        B) meteorologists are the only professionals who can disappearance of alchemy in China
          keep their jobs and still be wrong half the time                        
                                              D)alchemists continued in their relentless quest for gold
        C)scientists have studied cloud seeding with the goal of well into the sixteenth century
          making it rain in places experiencing prolonged                         
          droughts                            E) its objectives were to find ways of accelerating the
                                                rates at which metals could be changed into gold
        D)the weather has been a subject of intense interest and                  
          scrutiny by human beings since ancient times                            
        E) it seems unlikely that we will ever get to the point of                
          being able to predict the weather with 100 percent                      
          accuracy                                                                
                                            30. Although the available evidence shows no use of
                                              colour or decoration on early footwear, ----.
                                              A) the existence of twenty-five-thousand-year-old clothing
                                                suggests that footwear may be older than is even
                                                presently known                   
      28. Forensic investigators must collect evidence                            
                                              B) the elaborate weaving on some shoes seems to
        while the crime scene is still fresh ----.                                
                                                indicate that prehistoric people would care about the
        A) because forensic science is the use of scientific appearance of the shoes
          methods to investigate crimes                                           
                                              C)prehistoric shoes had to resist heavy usage, whether
        B) since forensic scientists study evidence at the homes made from leather or from plant fibers
          and workplaces of suspects                                              
                                              D)the oldest known shoes are ten-thousand-year-old
        C)although it is the job of forensic scientists to provide sandals found in a desert area of eastern Oregon
          evidence at a criminal trial          of the US                         
        D)even if the area is unsafe and they have to work under E) prehistoric humans would make their shoes shortly
          armed guard                           after killing animals, such as sheep and deer
        E) as many sciences, from chemistry to engineering, are                   
          used in an investigation                                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         6                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 9 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      31. While most research on the role of genetics and the 33. Some birds build nests simply to protect their young
        heritability of aggression has ruled out the idea of ----.                
        an aggressive gene, ----.                                                 
                                              A) since many small animals that live above the ground
        A) most definitions of aggression indicate that it make their homes in trees
          represents behaviours that are intended to hurt or                      
          harm another                        B) until they have learned how to look after themselves
                                                and survive in the wild on their own
        B) it is currently thought that one might inherit the                     
          biological susceptibility for being aggressive C)given that they make mud huts that are placed in all
                                                kinds of places, from undergrowth to fence posts
        C)one of the most widely discussed theories of                            
          aggressive behavior is Albert Bandura’s social D)although sometimes a squirrel takes over an empty
          learning theory                       bird's nest and makes its home there
        D)there are a number of different ways to conceptualise E) while colonies of wasps build their nests from the top
          subtypes of aggressive behaviours     downward                          
        E) much of the research on aggression has focused                         
          primarily upon children who are physically aggressive                   
                                                                                  
                                            34. Of the 20 amino acids that make up all proteins, 9
                                              are considered essential ----.      
      32. ----, it will not be possible to turn a draft into a A) if thousands of proteins are assembled from some 20
                                                different amino acids             
        finished piece of work.                                                   
        A) Although an author may have a hard time evaluating B) as the best sources of complete protein are lean
          what he or she has written            meats, fish, low-fat dairy products, and eggs
        B) Even if an author thinks that characterisation is poor in C)even if some foods are better sources of protein than
          his or her work                       others                            
        C)Unless an author knows the strengths and D)because they cannot be made in our bodies and must
          weaknesses of a manuscript            be obtained from the foods we eat 
        D)Because an author should realise that revision turns E) although the proteins in the foods we eat are digested
          an amateur into a professional        first into small peptides         
                                                                                  
        E) When rewriting and polishing lead an author to                         
          produce a good novel                                                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         7                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 10 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                37-42: For these questions, choose the most
                                               accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in
      35. Trans fat may be as harmful to your health as                           
                                               English, and the most accurate English translation
        saturated fat ----.                                                       
                                               of the sentences in Turkish.       
        A) because it increases blood cholesterol levels, among                   
          other adverse effects                                                   
                                            37. Since the 1970s, media literacy has developed
        B) although major sources are hardened vegetable fat through the work of educators who have
          such as margarine                   implemented programs to explore mass media,
                                              popular culture, and communication technologies
        C)as long as foods high in saturated fat include red with children and young people.
          meats and dairy products                                                
                                              A) Medya okuryazarlığı, kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve
        D)since a diet that has generous amounts of iletişim teknolojilerini çocuklar ve genç insanlarla
          vegetables is naturally lower in fat  keşfetmek için çalışan eğitimcilerin yaptığı programlar
                                                sayesinde 1970’lerden beri gelişmektedir.
        E) even if a diet high in fat can also be unnecessarily                   
                                              B) 1970’lerden beri medya okuryazarlığı, çocuklarla ve
          high in calories                                                        
                                                genç insanlarla kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve
                                                iletişim teknolojilerini keşfetmek için programlar
                                                uygulayan eğitimcilerin çalışmaları aracılığıyla
                                                gelişmektedir.                    
                                              C)Çocuklar ve genç insanlarla kitle iletişimini, popüler
                                                kültürü ve iletişim teknolojilerini keşfetmek için
                                                programlar düzenleyen eğitimcilerin çalışmaları
                                                sayesinde medya okuryazarlığı 1970’lerden
      36. ----, he was foremost an inventor and more                              
                                                günümüzdeki hâline gelmiştir.     
        interested in attracting public interest in his work                      
        than advancing scientific knowledge.                                      
                                              D)Medya okuryazarlığının gelişmesi çocuklarla ve genç
        A) When the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead insanlarla kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve iletişim
          famously credited Thomas Edison with the discovery teknolojilerini keşfetmek için 1970’lerden beri
          of a method of invention              programlar uygulayan eğitimcilerin çalışmaları
                                                sayesinde olmuştur.               
        B) While Thomas Edison saw himself as a member of the                     
          larger scientific community and presented papers                        
                                              E) Kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve iletişim teknolojilerini
          before the National Academy of Sciences                                 
                                                keşfetmek üzere 1970’lerden beri çocuklara ve genç
                                                insanlara uygulanan programlar eğitimcilerin
        C)As Thomas Edison began his inventive career by                          
                                                çalışmalarıyla birlikte medya okuryazarlığını
          becoming a contract inventor in the telegraph industry                  
                                                geliştirmiştir.                   
          after working as a telegraph operator in the mid-1860s                  
        D)Because Thomas Edison depended more on the                              
          assistance of a large staff of experimenters and                        
          machinists who made important contributions to his                      
          inventive efforts                                                       
        E) Although reputation was significant for Thomas                         
          Edison, particularly because of his popular image as                    
          the primary inventor of several new technologies                        
                                         8                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 11 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      38. As members of households established complex 40. Karşılaştığımız bütün problemleri eşit derecede
        relationships with outsiders during the agrarian era, iyi çözemeyebiliriz, çünkü her bir problem farklı ve
        they came under the influence of new rules, yaratıcı bir çözüm gerektirebilir.
        structures, and expectations.                                             
                                              A) We cannot solve all the problems we encounter
        A) Hane fertleri, tarım dönemi boyunca yabancılarla equally well because we may need to develop a
          çeşitli ilişkiler kurarak yeni kuralların, yapıların ve unique and creative solution to each problem.
          beklentilerin etkisi altına girmişlerdir.                               
                                              B) The reason why we may not deal with all the problems
        B) Hane fertlerinin yabancılarla karmaşık ilişkiler we confront equally well is that each problem may
          kurması tarım dönemine denk gelmiştir ve bu require a different and innovative solution.
          dönemde yeni kurallardan, yapılardan ve                                 
          beklentilerden etkilenmişlerdir.    C)Because each problem may call for a distinct and
                                                creative solution, all the problems we face cannot be
        C)Tarım döneminde hane fertlerinin yabancılarla çeşitli settled equally well.
          ilişkiler kurmasının sebebi; yeni kuralların, yapıların ve              
                                              D)We may not be able to solve all the problems we
          beklentilerin etkisi altına girmiş olmalarıdır.                         
                                                confront equally well since each problem might
        D)Tarım döneminde hane fertleri yabancılarla karmaşık require a different and creative solution.
          ilişkiler kurdukça yeni kuralların, yapıların ve                        
                                              E) We could not overcome all the problems we encounter
          beklentilerin etkisi altına girmişlerdir.                               
                                                equally well now that a different and innovative
        E) Yeni kuralların, yapıların ve beklentilerin etkisi altına solution may need to be produced for each problem.
          giren hane fertleri, tarım döneminde yabancılarla daha                  
          karmaşık ilişkiler kurmuşlardır.                                        
      39. More than a hundred different studies have shown                        
        that there really is a significant relation between                       
        happiness and physical health.                                            
        A) Yapılan yüzden fazla farklı çalışma göstermiştir ki                    
          mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasında gerçekten önemli                    
          bir ilişki bulunabilir.                                                 
        B) Mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasındaki önemli bir                       
          ilişkinin gerçekliği, yüzden fazla farklı çalışma                       
          sayesinde ortaya konmuştur.                                             
        C)Mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasında gerçekten önemli                    
          bir ilişki olup olmadığını göstermek için yüzden fazla                  
          farklı çalışma yapılmıştır.                                             
        D)Yüzden fazla farklı çalışma, mutluluk ile beden sağlığı                 
          arasında gerçekten önemli bir ilişki olduğunu                           
          göstermiştir.                                                           
        E) Yüzden fazla farklı çalışmaya göre, mutluluk ile beden                 
          sağlığı arasında gerçekten önemli bir ilişki olabilir.                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                         9                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 12 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      41. 20. yüzyılın başlarında Albert Einstein adında genç 42. Çıraklık sistemleri Avrupa ve Asya ülkelerinde
        bir Alman, klasik fiziği sarsarak ve mutlak bir zaman yaygın bir biçimde kullanılagelmiş olsa da Birleşik
        ve uzay fikrini sonlandırarak görelilik kuramını öne Devletler'dekinden biraz farklı bir biçimde
        sürdü.                                işlemektedir.                       
        A) At the turn of the 20th century, a young German A) Although apprenticeship systems have been used
          named Albert Einstein proposed his theory of relativity, widely in European and Asian countries, they operate
          shaking classical physics and ending the idea of an in a somewhat different manner than those in the
          absolute time and space.              United States.                    
                                              B) European and Asian countries have been widely using
        B) A young German named Albert Einstein shook                             
                                                apprenticeship systems that operate in a slightly
          classical physics at the beginning of the 20th                          
                                                different manner than the United States.
          century and put forward his theory of relativity, ending                
          the idea of an absolute time and space.                                 
                                              C)Apprenticeship systems are widely used not only in
                                                European and Asian countries but also in the United
        C)At the turn of the 20th century, a young German States, but in a somewhat different manner in the
          named Albert Einstein shook classical physics and former.               
          ended the idea of an absolute time and space                            
          by proposing his theory of relativity. D)Both European and Asian countries and the United
                                                States have been widely using apprenticeship
        D)Proposing his theory of relativity at the turn of the 20th systems, but the latter has been practising it in a
          century, a young German named Albert Einstein slightly different manner.
          shook classical physics and ended the idea of an                        
          absolute time and space.            E) There is a slight difference between the apprenticeship
                                                systems in European and Asian countries and those in
        E) The theory of relativity, proposed by a young German the United States, though both have been widely used
          named Albert Einstein at the beginning of the 20th for a long time.     
          century, shook classical physics and ended the idea of                  
          an absolute time and space.                                             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        10                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 13 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
          43-46: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    44. It is pointed out in the passage that the tap
                                              water ----.                         
                                              A) can dramatically increase the severity of diseases due
        Pick up a glass, fill it from the tap and take a sip. to the variety of compounds found in it
        You just had a tiny dose of the pill your neighbour took                  
        days before. Excreted and flushed through our sewage B) contains drugs that have been found to be illegal as
        works and waterways, drug molecules are all around us. they are harmful for human health
        A recent analysis of streams in the US detected an                        
        entire pharmacy: diabetic medications, muscle C)makes it possible for us to determine the types of pills
        relaxants, opioids, antibiotics, antidepressants and our neighbours take every day
        more. Drugs have even been found in crops irrigated by                    
        treated waste water. The amounts that end up in your D)contains medicinal leftovers, which can pass on to us
        glass are minuscule, and will not lay you low tomorrow. when we drink water from our taps
        However, someone prescribed multiple drugs is more                        
                                              E) does not pose any threats for human health because
        likely to experience side effects due to these small                      
                                                most of the drugs dissolve quite well in it
        doses, and risks rise exponentially with each drug taken                  
        by a person over 65. “These drugs have been                               
        individually approved but we have not studied what it                     
        means when they are together in the same soup,” says                      
        Mae Wu at the National Resources Defense Council                          
        (NRDC).                                                                   
                                            45. What can be inferred from Mae Wu's words?
                                              A) The combination of medical waste in the tap water
                                                creates a very hazardous toxic soup.
      43. Which of the following can be true about the tap B) She believes that drinking tap water can cause serious
        water in the US?                        side effects in most people.      
        A) The drugs in the tap water are not expected to have                    
                                              C)The NRDC is planning to study the effects of drugs
          immediate side effects on healthy people.                               
                                                when they are together in the same mixture.
        B) There can be a lower risk for elder members of society                 
                                              D)Despite being approved individually, all drugs can be
          who take more than one drug a day.                                      
                                                dangerous when mixed with tap water.
        C)Most drugs in the tap water are harmless, but illegal                   
                                              E) She is unsure of the health effects of the combination
          ones can make people sick.                                              
                                                of small doses of different drugs in the tap water.
        D)It is more likely for a person to be affected if there are              
          multiple drug residues in the tap water.                                
        E) The tap water used in houses does not cause negative                   
          effects for adults at all.                                              
                                            46. What is the main purpose of the author?
                                              A) To blame the US authorities for failing to take
                                                precautions against drug leftovers
                                              B) To catch the attention of academicians to find a
                                                solution to the problem of contaminated tap water
                                              C)To dissuade readers from continuing to use tap water
                                                in the US                         
                                              D)To warn readers against possible health risks that may
                                                be caused by tap water            
                                              E) To call for more action from the NRDC in sterilising tap
                                                water                             
                                        11                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 14 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
          47-50: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    48. How does a horned lizard defend itself when faced
                                              with a predator?                    
                                              A) It blends into its surroundings using its natural
        Admired by native peoples for thousands of years, the colouring and shape.
        Texas horned lizard has an array of abilities. It mostly                  
        eats ants – lots of them, and most parts of an ant’s body B) It freezes the predator with the help of its spines.
        are indigestible, which necessitates a huge stomach.                      
        Eating more than two hundred ants per day means C)It makes itself smaller than normal to confuse the
        exposure out in the open for long periods, and having a predator.         
        ‘heavy’ stomach means that a horned lizard finds it                       
        difficult to run away from predators. Instead, it relies on D)It releases a kind of liquid to make the predator
        an armory of defences. It has camouflage colouring, suffocate.            
        with an outline broken up by spines and outgrowths, and                   
        it will freeze if a predator approaches. Its horns and E) It changes its colour and shape to become more
        spines can pierce the throat of a snake or bird, and it threatening to its predators.
        can hiss and blow itself up to look even more fearsome.                   
        When it comes to coyotes, foxes, and dogs, a horned                       
        lizard’s most spectacular defence is to squirt foul-tasting               
        blood from the sinuses behind its eyes. That usually has                  
        the desired effect. But it squirts only when it is provoked,              
        since it risks losing up to one quarter of its blood. Such                
        abilities are, however, no defense against human 49. It could be bad for a horned lizard to use its
        invasion of its land. Its strange shape and colouring has own blood for defence because ----.
        made it attractive to reptile collectors, and its habit of                
                                              A) it might lose a high amount of blood, which would put
        freezing means that it is prone to being run over.                        
                                                its life at risk                  
                                              B) predators like the taste of the blood, making them
                                                more willing to eat it            
                                              C)the bright colour of the blood could make it easy
      47. For a horned lizard, eating too many ants means                         
                                                for predators to see it           
        that it ----.                                                             
        A) has to spend more time to digest what it has eaten D)it is an ineffective way of defence when the predator is
          than to hunt for food                 a snake or bird                   
        B) is more vulnerable to predators while trying to run E) the smell of the blood could attract more predators
          away                                                                    
        C)will become highly indigestible for its predators                       
        D)seems to get physically stronger in its struggle                        
          to survive in the wild                                                  
                                            50. Upon contact with humans, a horned lizard ----.
        E) causes a huge decrease in the ant population living                    
                                              A) is often hunted by collectors due to being confused
          around its habitat                                                      
                                                with other reptiles               
                                              B) attacks humans in an effort to defend its territory
                                              C)is likely to be run over because it does not move when
                                                in danger                         
                                              D)immediately changes its original shape and colour
                                              E) tries to escape by crawling rather than moving fast
                                                                                  
                                        12                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 15 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
          51-54: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    52. It is emphasised in the passage that Richard
                                              Aidan Martin ----.                  
                                              A) monitored great whites mistaking surfers and
        More mythology surrounds the shark than any scuba-divers for seals and sea lions
        other creatures in the ocean. This is partly a symptom                    
        of their colossal size – adult male great whites can B) focused especially on the disadvantages of great
        measure in excess of five metres; the temptation for whites’ notoriously poor vision
        humans to add a metre here or there after reported                        
        sightings is irresistable. Sharks are also, by nature, C)examined attacks on sea lions by great whites to
        mysterious. Scientists still know next to nothing about prove their aggressive nature
        great whites’ breeding habits; a birth in the wild has                    
        never been observed. One of the biggest great D)noted that great whites do not come closer to humans
        white shark myths is that the creature, disabled by its in an actively predatory way
        notoriously poor vision, often mistakes surfers and                       
                                              E) tried to collect precise information on great whites by
        scuba-divers for its main prey – seals and sea lions.                     
                                                observing 1,000 attacks on humans 
        “Completely false,” says Richard Aidan Martin, director                   
        of the ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research in                             
        Vancouver, Canada. After observing 1,000 predatory                        
        attacks on sea lions by great whites for five years, he                   
        states that the sharks rocket to the surface and crush                    
        their prey with incredible force; however, they usually                   
        approach humans with leisurely or undramatic                              
        behaviour. Martin points out that great whites are 53. Which of the following is pointed out in the
        curious and investigative animals, which is what most passage?            
        people do not realise. When great whites bite something A) Great whites confuse humans with seals and sea lions
        unfamiliar to them, whether a person or a sea creature, due to their low ability to see.
        they are looking for tactile evidence about what it is.                   
        They usually throw humans out of their mouth after B) Great whites bite humans to explore if their bones are
        an exploratory bite rather than swallow them for food to their taste.     
        because humans are too bony. To add more, great                           
        whites must be extremely selective about their diet. C)Great whites are often incapable of choosing the right
        Their digestive tracts function very slowly, and eating food for their diet.
        the wrong thing would slow the shark down for days and                    
        stop them from consuming anything else. D)Great whites avoid biting humans and sea creatures
                                                that are unfamiliar to them.      
                                              E) Great whites' diet does not include humans because
                                                they have too much bone for them. 
      51. It is understood from the passage that great whites                     
        ----.                                                                     
        A) have hardly ever been examined in terms of their                       
          breeding habits                                                         
                                            54. Which could be the best title for this passage?
        B) are mysterious because why they mainly prey on seals                   
          and sea lions has not been clarified A) The Extraordinary Diet of Great Whites
        C)are giant creatures whose size can never be B) The Unknown World of Great Whites
          measured exactly                                                        
                                              C)Deadly Attacks of Great Whites on Humans
        D)have been studied more extensively than any other                       
          creatures in the ocean                                                  
                                              D)The Impressive Size of Great Whites
        E) have unusual breeding habits to which scientists have                  
                                              E) Enormous Diversity of Great Whites’ Prey
          been paying particular attention                                        
                                        13                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 16 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
          55-58: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    56. What can be understood about Humperdinck?
                                              A) He was criticised for presenting Hansel and Gretel
                                                differently from the previous versions of it.
        The story of Hansel and Gretel, in which two children                     
                                              B) He intentionally highlighted some details of Hansel
        outsmart a witch who is about to destroy them, was                        
                                                and Gretel to increase its popularity.
        passed down to us from the brothers Jacob and                             
        Wilhelm Grimm. They began recording various folk tales                    
                                              C)He reached a large audience especially attracted
        told to them by villagers and farmers near the town of                    
                                                to the opera but not to the story of Hansel and Gretel.
        Kassel, Germany, in about 1807. Hansel and Gretel was                     
        told to the brothers by a young girl, Doretchen Wild, who                 
                                              D)He made Hansel and Gretel quite famous by
        years later became Wilhelm Grimm's wife. The fairy                        
                                                producing a children's opera inspired by the story.
        tale gained wide popularity after German composer                         
        Engelbert Humperdinck made it the basis of a children's                   
                                              E) He removed the traumatising part of Hansel and
        opera, first introduced in Munich in 1893. However, the                   
                                                Gretel to create a more cheerful story.
        opera, as well as subsequent versions of the story,                       
        omits the most traumatising aspect of the traditional                     
        tale: the parents’ deliberate abandonment of their                        
        children to the wild beasts of the forest. Another                        
        important feature of Hansel and Gretel is that it was not                 
        only known through German oral tradition. A version                       
        circulating in France as early as the late 17thcentury                    
                                            57. The saddest part of Hansel and Gretel is that ----.
        had a house made not of gingerbread but of gold and                       
        jewels, in which a young girl is held by a giant whom she A) a giant in France is pushed into a fire by a little girl
        eventually pushes into his own fire. However, it was the                  
        Grimm brothers who immortalised the tale for future B) the children's parents are not aware of the dangers of
        generations – an excellent story that every child wild beasts in the forest
        throughout the world should come across.                                  
                                              C)the parents do not care for their children and cause
                                                them to get caught by a witch     
                                              D)despite the presence of wild beasts, the children are
                                                left alone in the forest without any concern
      55. Which of the following can be said about the story                      
                                              E) a young girl is captured in a giant's house
        of Hansel and Gretel?                                                     
        A) It was initially written by the Grimm brothers and                     
          became very popular in a short time.                                    
        B) It illustrates the dangers faced by two children who                   
          lived in Kassel, Germany, in about 1807.                                
        C)It reveals the typical features of German culture 58. What is the Grimm brothers' impact on the story of
          because it is told by villagers and farmers. Hansel and Gretel?         
                                              A) They gave inspiration to many other arts, and showed
        D)It was verbally transferred to the Grimm brothers like a fairy tale can be a product of popular culture.
          some other stories.                                                     
                                              B) They recorded one of the diverse versions of the
        E) It was told by Doretchen Wild to the villagers and story and made it universally known as a children's
          farmers in Kassel, Germany.           literature must-read.             
                                              C)They added a new dimension to children's literature by
                                                telling a story which has wild beasts and witches trying
                                                to catch children.                
                                              D)They proved that the important thing is to record a
                                                story so it can be used in other cultural activities.
                                              E) They showed that traumatising events can be used as
                                                instructions for children.        
                                        14                     Go on to the next page.

--- PAGE 17 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
          59-62: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    60. What motivated Piccard to fly around the world in a
                                              solar-powered plane?                
                                              A) His desire to follow in his family’s footsteps and
        In Bertrand Piccard’s family, there is a tradition of being continue their tradition of being first
        first. His grandfather, Auguste, was the first person to                  
        ride a balloon into the stratosphere. His father, Jacques, B) His awareness of the need to develop environmentally
        was the first to reach the Earth’s deepest point, the friendly, cost-effective engineering
        Pacific’s Mariana Trench. And in 1999, Piccard                            
        completed the first non-stop, around-the-world balloon C)His previous success and his desire to be
        flight. This feat, plus an environmentally conscious environmentally friendly
        approach to innovation, spurred the renowned Swiss                        
        adventurer to dream of circumnavigating the globe in a D)His attempt to make the world’s first balloon flight
        plane that uses no fuel. The result is the Solar Impulse                  
        2, an aircraft equipped with more than 17,000 solar E) His knowledge of green technologies and his family’s
        cells. Thanks to lithium batteries that efficiently store concern about pollution and energy problems
        energy reserves, it is the first solar-powered plane that                 
        can fly through the night. “If we want to solve our                       
        pollution and energy problems,” says Piccard, a                           
        psychiatrist by training, “we need to increase our energy                 
        efficiency and focus on clean technologies. Solar                         
        Impulse 2 is really a way to show that those                              
        technologies are mature.”           61. What is clearly stated as being unique about
                                              Piccard’s aircraft?                 
                                              A) It has more solar cells than any aircraft built before it.
                                              B) It runs completely on the cleanest lithium batteries.
      59. What can be inferred about Piccard’s father and                         
                                              C)It has very efficient energy storage means, which will
        grandfather?                                                              
                                                allow it to fly at night.         
        A) They preferred to follow their dreams rather than have                 
          careers.                            D)It uses solar cells for power, allowing it to fly without
                                                fuel or the need to ever stop.    
        B) They were not afraid of taking risks and pursuing their                
          dreams.                             E) It reserves all the energy it gains from the solar cells in
                                                lithium batteries.                
        C)They were both renowned scientists in their fields.                     
        D)They were very supportive of Piccard’s ambitions.                       
        E) They were just as concerned about the environment                      
          as Piccard.                                                             
                                            62. In Piccard’s own words, what is the main purpose of
                                              Solar Impulse 2?                    
                                              A) To show that a plane with no fuel is able to fly around
                                                the world                         
                                              B) To indicate that more needs to be done to further
                                                develop solar-powered planes      
                                              C)To contribute to the improvement of lithium batteries’
                                                efficiency                        
                                              D)To demonstrate that the technology available today is
                                                ready to help solve pollution and energyproblems
                                              E) To prepare the world for the next generation of clean
                                                technologies                      
                                        15                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 18 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          63-67: For these questions, choose the best                             
                                            64. Researcher:                       
         option to complete the dialogue.                                         
                                               From your documentary, we learned that Princess
                                                Diana secretly collaborated with journalist
                                                Andrew Morton to write a book about her life, in
      63. Reporter:                             which he discloses details of her troubled
         Kids love to eat hamburgers, but they're not very relations with the royal family.
          healthy. Tell us about the public school                                
          initiative to make lunches healthier for students. Documentarist:       
                                               Well, when the book was published in 1992,
        Dietician:                              Diana’s cooperation was a secret. But, when
         With some help from food engineers, we've Morton republished the book after her death in
          created a mushroom-beef blend that's being used 1997, he exposed the fact that Diana herself was
          in schools across the country to help students eat the direct source for many revelations in the book.
          healthier.                                                              
                                              Reporter:                           
        Reporter:                              ----                              
         ----                                                                    
                                              Documentarist:                      
        Dietician:                             He wanted to bring an important fact to light; the
         True. In addition to fewer calories and saturated Princess herself wanted the public to know she
          fats than regular hamburgers, this blend is also a was not living a fairy tale, but a life of misery.
          greener alternative to meat since mushrooms are                         
                                              A) Why did Morton’s book change the way the world
          more sustainable than beef.                                             
                                                looked at the royal family?       
        Reporter:                                                                 
                                              B) Do you think the public was as deeply affected as
         That makes sense as they require fewer resources                        
                                                Morton by Diana’s death?          
          than livestock to produce.                                              
        A) I think there are more than just health benefits to using C)How could Morton convince people that his book was
          this vegetable and meat blend.        based on Diana’s own words?       
        B) It seems that the health benefits are the most positive D)What may have prompted Morton to reveal Diana’s
          thing about this vegetable and meat blend. involvement in the publication?
        C)As far as I understand, blending mushrooms with beef E) How did Morton deal with the criticism from the royal
          requires some careful procedures.     family and the British media?     
        D)I don't think this is a more sustainable alternative to                 
          traditional meat hamburgers.                                            
        E) Great! I think students will like eating this vegetable                
          and meat blend at lunch.                                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        16                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 19 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      65. Journalist:                       66. Professor:                        
         You’re the co-leader of an international project to  And here you see a picture of a littledevil frog.
          drill for rock samples in the South China Sea. Why The male produces noisy sounds in pursuit of a
          is that sea bed of such interest?     partner.                          
        Geophysicist:                         Student:                            
         We want to answer questions about when it was  ----                    
          formed to better understand continental                                 
          movements.                          Professor:                          
                                               Well, he's a poisonous frog and has bright
        Journalist:                             colours which warn predators that he's unsafe to
         ----                                  eat.                              
        Geophysicist:                         Student:                            
         We also plan to study the microbiology of the  How significant characteristics it has!
          ocean crust to see if there are new organisms at A) Do the sounds he makes differ or does he use the
          these great depths.                   same kind of sounds?              
        A) What key questions do you hope to answer?                              
                                              B) How do the partners react to these sounds when they
                                                hear them?                        
        B) What kind of rocks do you expect to find?                              
                                              C)Is it really difficult for the little devil frog to find a
        C)How will you determine how old the rocks are?                           
                                                partner?                          
        D)What methods are you going to use to collect all these                  
                                              D)But doesn't it make him noticeable and vulnerable to
          samples?                                                                
                                                being attacked?                   
        E) What other things may this study help us understand?                   
                                              E) Is it only males, or do females also produce such
                                                sounds before mating?             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        17                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 20 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                68-71: For these questions, choose the best
      67. Matthew:                                                                
                                               rephrased form of the given sentence.
         A friend of mine plays in an orchestra and has                          
          invited me to their concert. I’m really nervous                         
          because I don’t know anything about orchestras.                         
                                            68. While in Holland, John Locke had time to complete a
        Judy:                                 number of important works that established his
         Actually, most people don’t know much about reputation as England’s foremost political theorist.
          orchestras. Just pay attention to the instrument                        
                                              A) Whereas John Locke wrote many of his important
          categories, and then you’ll be less worried.                            
                                                works in Holland, he earned a reputation as the most
                                                important political theorist in England.
        Matthew:                                                                  
         ----                                B) John Locke, who was famous for being England’s
                                                principal political theorist, spent some time in Holland
        Judy:                                   to produce some of his most important works.
         Well, each group sits together. First, you have the                     
                                              C)His stay in Holland, during which he completed most
          strings. Woodwinds are in the following section.                        
                                                of his important works, helped John Locke to be
          Behind them are the brass instruments, and at the                       
                                                accepted as one of the most significant political
          back is the percussion section.                                         
                                                theorists of England.             
        A) How do you know the features of all these                              
          categories? Have you ever taken a course about D)Thanks to several important works he finished during
          orchestras?                           his stay in Holland, John Locke made quite a name for
                                                himself as the leading political theorist of England.
        B) How exactly is a typical orchestra organised? If I learn               
          that at least, maybe I can relax and enjoy the E) It was the countless important works he finalised in
          performance.                          Holland that earned him a name as one of the most
                                                prominent political theorists in England.
        C)As far as I know, you’ve attended several concerts                      
          before. Can you predict what will attract me most at                    
          the concert?                                                            
        D)What do you know about the percussion section? I                        
          think that’s the section my friend plays in. So, please                 
          tell me about it.                                                       
        E) I don’t even know the name of instruments played in                    
          an orchestra. Are there many different instruments?                     
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        18                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 21 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      69. Delicately carved from mammoth tusk, the Lady of 70. While professional advertisers scoff at the idea, the
        Brassempouy was discovered in southwest France general public seems to assume that subliminal
        in 1894 and is among the oldest representations of a advertising is widely and effectively practiced.
        human face.                                                               
                                              A) Despite the fact that professional advertisers ridicule
        A) The oldest representation of a human's face is the public for believing in the widespread and efficient
          an 1894 mammoth tusk, delicate carving of the Lady use of subliminal advertising, the public still insists on
          of Brassempouy, which was found in southwest doing so.                  
          France.                                                                 
                                              B) As professional advertisers praise this concept, an
        B) The Lady of Brassempouy, representing the oldest increasing portion of the population also believes that
          human face, was made from gently carved mammoth subliminal advertising is commonly and efficiently
          tusk and unearthed in southwest France in 1894. used.                   
                                              C)Professional advertisers appear to be praising the idea
        C)Found in 1894 in southwest France, the Lady of                          
                                                that subliminal advertising is generally practiced, an
          Brassempouy is one of the oldest representations of a                   
                                                assumption commonly held by the general public.
          human face, gently carved from the tusk of a                            
          mammoth.                                                                
                                              D)It appears that ordinary people believe subliminal
                                                advertising is extensively and successfully carried out
        D)Amongst many delicate mammoth tusk carvings of the                      
                                                although professional advertisers laugh at this notion.
          human face, the Lady of Brassempouy is the oldest                       
          and its discovery was made in southwest France in                       
                                              E) The general population thinks that there are some
          1894.                                                                   
                                                people who make use of subliminal advertising
                                                efficiently; however, professional advertisers seem to
        E) One of the oldest delicate human face carvings, the                    
                                                think the opposite.               
          Lady of Brassempouy was identified in 1894 to be                        
          made of mammoth tusk in southwest France.                               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        19                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 22 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                72-75: For these questions, choose the best
      71. The years following the 1789 revolution in France option to complete the missing part of the
        brought massive upheaval in French society, which, passage.               
        in turn, produced profound changes in dress and                           
        fashion.                                                                  
                                            72. It has been a basic tenet that an individual who uses
        A) Although the revolution took place in France in 1789, it               
                                              substances heavily will become addicted. There are
          was only after many years that French society went                      
                                              reports, however, of people becoming addicted to a
          through considerable changes in dress and fashion                       
                                              substance with exposure only once or a few times.
          following this great disturbance in their society.                      
                                              Some experts believe people are born with the
        B) The revolution in France in 1789 led to a serious predisposition to become addicted. ---- Thus, the
          disturbance among people in French society, and this potential for addiction may be hereditary. On the
          was the reason why the French had to allow for other hand, a psychological problem may lead the
          fundamental and important changes in dress and individual into addiction. The need for instant
          fashion.                            gratification, a feeling of being socially ostracized,
                                              and an inability to cope with the downfalls of life
        C)If it were not for the revolution in France in 1789, dress have all been cited as possible springboards to
          and fashion in French society might not have changed addiction.         
          considerably despite the enormous disturbance it                        
                                              A) One characteristic that marks addiction, whether to
          caused in their society.                                                
                                                chemicals or nonchemical practices, is the genetic
        D)What contributed to the revolution in France in 1789 modification it leads to.
          were the major changes in dress and fashion, which                      
                                              B) A careful medically-controlled withdrawal program can
          resulted from the huge confusion experienced by                         
                                                reverse the chemical changes in genes caused by the
          French society at that time.                                            
                                                addiction.                        
        E) It was not until after the revolution in France in 1789                
                                              C)Habitual use of an addictive substance can produce
          that French society experienced dramatic changes in                     
                                                changes in body chemistry and any treatment must be
          dress and fashion, due to the enormous turmoil                          
                                                geared to a gradual reduction in dosage.
          generated by this period.                                               
                                              D)Studies have found that many former addicts have
                                                enough determination to avoid drugs for the rest of
                                                their lives.                      
                                              E) Children of addicts have a greater probability of
                                                becoming addicts themselves than children whose
                                                parents are not.                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        20                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 23 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      73. In almost all cultures and societies, children have 74. Fossils are remnants or traces of an animal or plant
        collected a broad spectrum of items. Although the of a past geologic age that have been preserved in
        activity seems to be universal, very little has been various ways in the Earth’s crust. From earliest
        written on this subject. And even though collecting times people must have seen fossils, but the first
        has played an important part in many individuals’ reports we have on the subject are from the ancient
        lives, it is seldom described in memoirs or Greeks. Xenophanes of the early Ionian school is
        autobiographies. This may be because many said to have noticed fossilised sea creatures high
        collections are suddenly abandoned when the on mountains; he correctly interpreted this as
        collector grows up. ---- Other collections, however, meaning that these mountains had once been under
        continue into adult life, becoming lifelong water. ---- For example, he associated the fossilised
        passionate occupations; this is especially likely with bones of large creatures with mythical animals or
        collections that have some kind of economic value with giant humans.      
        or present the adult with challenges or opportunities A) In the 17th century, Nicolaus Steno argued
        for further study.                                                        
                                                persuasively that fossils are remains of living
        A) Most children will carry on adding to their collections organisms.     
          throughout adulthood because they are so attached to                    
          them.                               B) In Roman times, Suetonius casually mentions that the
                                                emperor Augustus kept a collection of large fossil
        B) Many are often split up and disappear during bones in his villa.       
          childhood unless parents understand the fascinating                     
          world of the small collector and pay special attention to C)The famous scholar Avicenna put forward an idea that
          saving them.                          confused people about fossils for centuries.
        C)The spirit of the collector, once established, never D)Later, Herodotus reached the same conclusion
          leaves the individual but is turned in new directions regarding fossilized clam shells, but he misinterpreted
          and can result in life-changing career choices. other fossils.          
        D)Grand collections may end up in places like museums,                    
                                              E) Theophrastus, Aristotle’s successor, is said to have
          which seems to be the dream of collectors who do not                    
                                                written a book on fossils, which was lost later, where
          want their passionate investments to disappear with                     
                                                he refers to fossilised fish.     
          them.                                                                   
        E) Collecting trains the eye, creates a sense of order, and               
          develops aesthetic appreciation, while at the same                      
          time creating a sense of economic appreciation for                      
          certain items.                                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        21                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 24 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant
      75. According to a World Bank report in1993, the East                       
                                               sentence in the passage.           
        Asian miracle, achieving high economic growth for                         
        all people, is due to a combination of fundamentally                      
        sound development policies, tailored interventions,                       
        and an unusually rapid increase of physical and 76. (I)Across the globe, people greeted the end of World
        human capital. The more advanced economies in War II with a profound sense of relief. (II) By virtually any
                                              measurement, the war had been the most devastating
        the Asian region are part of this success and have                        
                                              conflict in human history. (III)The more traditional and
        been referred to as high-performing East Asian                            
                                              more widely accepted date for the start of World War II
        economies. ---- In addition, these economies have                         
                                              is 1 September 1939, with the quick but not quite
        displayed high per capita incomes, along with a                           
                                              blitzkrieg (lightning) German invasion of Poland.
        much-improved income distribution, compared with                          
                                              (IV)The war’s economic cost alone has been calculated
        most other developing economies.                                          
                                              at perhaps five times that of World War I. (V) In human
        A) In contrast, the dramatic growth of the Asian tiger terms, it claimed half again as many military lives:
          economies has been based on the export of 15 million versus 10 million for World War I.
          manufactured goods.                                                     
                                              A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V      
        B) Poorer countries have greater difficulty than relatively               
          richer countries climbing up the ladder of                              
          development.                                                            
        C)The study suggests that economies with a strong                         
          inward focus could not succeed.                                         
        D)Such economies have a record of high and sustained                      
          economic growth.                  77. (I)The idea of the human mind as the domain of
                                              absolute protection from external intrusion has persisted
        E) Promoting trade is positively related to levels of per                 
                                              for centuries. (II)Today, however, this presumption
          capita income.                                                          
                                              might no longer hold. (III)Sophisticated neuro-imaging
                                              machines detect the electrical activity of neurons,
                                              enabling us to decode and even alter the nervous
                                              system signals that accompany mental processes.
                                              (IV)Medical devices connected to the brain are
                                              vulnerable to sabotage, and neuroscientists suggest
                                              that the same vulnerability applies to brain implants.
                                              (V)Whereas these advances have a great potential for
                                              research and medicine, they pose a fundamental
                                              ethical, legal and social challenge: determining under
                                              what conditions it is legitimate to gain access to another
                                              person’s neural activity.           
                                              A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                        22                     Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 25 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2018-Y DS Spring/English                                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      78. (I) The best conditions for dandelion seeds are relatively 80. (I)Established on 7 April 1948, the World Health
        calm, sunny days that generate thermal updraughts. Organisation (WHO) is one of the original agencies of
        (II) A 2003 study at the University of Regensburg in the United Nations. (II)WHO defines health not merely
        Germany found that 99.5 percent of dandelion seeds as the absence of disease or illness, but as a state of
        land within 10 metres of their plant. (III) That is because complete physical, mental, and social well-being.
        the seed 'parachute' falls at about 30 cm per second (III)Headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, WHO was
        and dandelions only grow about 30 cm high. (IV) So, that set up to improve international cooperation for better
        gives each seed just one second of flight time to be health conditions across the world. (IV)It took over from
        blown sideways by the wind to its new home. (V) Higher the Health Organisation of the League of Nations and
        wind speeds do not really increase the distance the the International Public Office of Health in Paris.
        seeds fly, because strong winds tend to blow (V) Those two organisations had focused on the control
        downwards as well as sideways, so the seeds just land of epidemics, quarantine measures, and the
        even sooner.                          standardisation of drugs.           
        A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V        A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      79. (I)The conventional wisdom is that it is a molecule's                   
        specific shape that allows our noses to distinguish                       
        between one smell and another. (II)But there is new                       
        evidence that it is actually the frequency of a molecule's                
        vibration, a quantum effect, that is all-important.                       
        (III)Most olfactory (smell) scientists believe that                       
        receptors within our noses act like a lock that can only                  
        be activated by a molecule of a specific shape – the                      
        'key'. (IV)Molecules are collections of atoms that can be                 
        thought of as being connected by springs that can                         
        vibrate. (V)The trouble is, some molecules with different                 
        shapes have similar smells.                                               
        A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V                                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                 END OF THE TEST  
                                        23                                        
                                                             CHECK YOUR ANSWERS   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 27 ---

                                                                                  
               2018 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (İLKBAHAR DÖNEMİ)    
                                                                                  
                                 2018 - YDS İLKBAHAR                              
                                                                                  
                                     01-04-2018                                   
                                                                                  
                         TEST OF ENGLISH     TEST OF ENGLISH                      
                              1. C               48. A                            
                              2. C               49. A                            
                                                                                  
                              3. B               50. C                            
                              4. D               51. A                            
                              5. B               52. D                            
                              6. E               53. E                            
                              7. C               54. B                            
                              8. D               55. D                            
                                                                                  
                              9. C               56. D                            
                             10. C               57. D                            
                             11. C               58. B                            
                             12. B               59. B                            
                             13. C               60. C                            
                             14. D               61. C                            
                                                                                  
                             15. E               62. D                            
                             16. E               63. A                            
                             17. E               64. D                            
                             18. C               65. E                            
                             19. D               66. D                            
                                                                                  
                             20. C               67. B                            
                             21. A               68. D                            
                             22. B               69. C                            
                             23. E               70. D                            
                             24. C               71. E                            
                             25. B               72. E                            
                                                                                  
                             26. A               73. B                            
                             27. D               74. D                            
                             28. D               75. D                            
                             29. A               76. C                            
                             30. B               77. D                            
                             31. B               78. A                            
                                                                                  
                             32. C               79. D                            
                             33. B               80. B                            
                             34. D                                                
                             35. A                                                
                             36. B                                                
                                                                                  
                             37. B                                                
                             38. D                                                
                             39. D                                                
                             40. D                                                
                             41. A                                                
                             42. A                                                
                                                                                  
                             43. A                                                
                             44. D                                                
                             45. E                                                
                             46. D                                                
                             47. B                                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  