
--- PAGE 1 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                             T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
Z                                                                                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                YABANCI     DİL  BİLGİSİ          
                                                SEVİYE   TESPİT    SINAVI         
                                                                                  
                                                                 (YDS/1)          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                            İNGİLİZCE             
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                          24 MART    2019         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
     Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi,
     fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve
     testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır.        
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 3 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English           TEST OF ENGLISH                               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      This test consists of 80 questions.                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or                       
                                            3. Although empirical studies into the brain’s left and
         expression to fill the space.                                            
                                              right hemispheric participation in language
                                              acquisition are ---- and differ from each other,
                                              some observational studies indicate that adults
       1. Like the rest of the animal kingdom, mammals need might benefit from right-brain-oriented activities in
        food for energy and the ---- of bodily processes such the foreign language classroom.
        as growth and reproduction.                                               
                                              A)unavailable   B)indispensible     
        A)suspension     B)deterioration                                          
                                              C)indestructible D)inconclusive     
        C)maintenance    D)elaboration                                            
                                                       E)unprecedented            
                 E)persistence                                                    
                                                                                  
                                            4. The foundations of international law as it is
       2. With rapid advancements in technology, there understood today lie ---- in the development of
        are new ----, already seen in countries such as Western culture and political organisation.
        Myanmar and Sri Lanka where social media apps                             
                                              A)eligibly      B)instantly         
        have been instrumental in spreading fake news and                         
        violence.                                                                 
                                              C)adequately    D)firmly            
        A)measures       B)adjustments                                            
                                                       E)convertibly              
        C)incentives     D)threats                                                
                 E)obligations                                                    
                                                                                  
                                            5. There is a link between sunlight and the chemical
                                              serotonin, which ---- our mood and is important in
                                              reducing anxiety disorders.         
                                              A)initiates     B)detects           
                                                                                  
                                              C)reveals       D)hinders           
                                                                                  
                                                       E)boosts                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 4 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       6. Parkinson’s disease is a movement disorder that 8. As two-thirds of homes in the US owned radio
        ---- the death of neurons producing dopamine, a receivers by the end of the 1920s, people no longer
        neurochemical that dispatches messages to parts of ---- to a concert, play, or sporting event to be
        the brain that control motor skills and coordination. entertained; instead, they ---- many forms of
                                              entertainment from the comfort of their homes.
        A)takes over     B)stems from                                             
                                              A) should have gone / must have enjoyed
        C)makes up       D)pins down                                              
                                              B) may go / were able to enjoy      
                 E)gets through                                                   
                                              C)used to go / may have enjoyed     
                                              D)had to go / could enjoy           
                                              E) would go / ought to have enjoyed 
                                                                                  
          7-16: For these questions, choose the best                              
         word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s).                           
                                                                                  
       7. In its early stage of development, ecotourism ---- as                   
        a completely new concept; however, today, it ---- a                       
                                             9. Humanity’s extraordinary success ---- due to our
        significant portion of the tourism industry in                            
                                              ingenuity in devising cultural means ---- our physical
        general.                                                                  
                                              limitations.                        
        A) was going to be regarded / is becoming                                 
                                              A) has been / to overcome           
        B) had been regarded / will become                                        
                                              B) was / having overcome            
        C)was being regarded / is going to become                                 
                                              C)had been / overcoming             
        D)was regarded / has become                                               
                                              D)is / overcome                     
        E) has been regarded / becomes                                            
                                              E) will be / to have overcome       
                                                                                  
                                            10. The geographical spread of English is unique ---- the
                                              languages of the world, and it is an official
                                              language in about 50 countries, where it is used in
                                              addition to the indigenous first languages ---- a
                                              variety of public and personal functions.
                                              A)from / at      B)to / on          
                                                                                  
                                              C)through / with D)among / for      
                                                       E)about / in               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 5 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      11. Weather is defined as the state of the atmosphere 14. To psychology professionals, the name Anne
        ---- a given location and ---- a relatively short period Anastasi is synonymous with psychometrics, ---- it
        of time.                              was she who pioneered understanding how
                                              psychological traits are influenced, developed, and
        A)along / on     B)towards / in                                           
                                              measured.                           
        C)at / over      D)from / against     A)so             B)even if          
                 E)for / about                C)while          D)yet              
                                                       E)as                       
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      12. Renaissance art evolved from a common set of                            
        principles, ---- it took many directions and changed                      
        considerably in the following centuries. 15. Music is a very small word to encompass something
        A)instead        B)provided that      that takes ---- many forms ---- there are cultural and
                                              subcultural identities.             
        C)but            D)for                A)either / or    B)both / and       
                                                                                  
                 E)so                         C)as / as        D)such / that      
                                                       E)not only / but also      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      13. ---- palaeontologists still like to argue about what                    
        role the asteroid played in the dinosaur extinction,                      
        there really is not much of a mystery left. 16. Although genetically modified seed is more
        A)Once           B)In case            expensive than conventional equivalents, the extra
                                              cost can be seen as an insurance policy against
        C)Given that     D)Although           crop losses ---- weeds or pests.    
                                              A)contrary to    B)due to           
                 E)As                                                             
                                              C)in terms of    D)despite          
                                                       E)along with               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 6 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
          17-21: For these questions, choose the best                             
          word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19.                        
          passage.                                                                
                                              A)even so        B)thus             
        Today the deadly poliomyelitis virus is only endemic to C)conversely D)instead
        four countries – Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and                         
        Pakistan. This is (17)---- the groundbreaking research E)otherwise        
        undertaken by doctor and biologist Jonas Salk. In 1947,                   
        at the University of Pittsburgh, Salk combined his work                   
        on the influenza vaccine with his search for a vaccine to                 
        protect (18)----poliomyelitis. The virus was deadly in 5 to               
        10 percent of cases where patients became paralysed,                      
        and (19)---- were unable to breathe. Medical opinion at                   
        the time held that only a live virus (20)---- total immunity,             
        but Salk disproved this. In 1952 he used formaldehyde,                    
        a gas with a strong smell, to inactivate the poliomyelitis                
        virus and developed a vaccine still capable of triggering                 
                                            20.                                   
        an immune response in a host. Initially tested on                         
        monkeys, then human patients, Salk’s success (21)---- A)had to prompt B)would have prompted
        him to test it on himself, his family, his staff, and other               
        volunteers.                           C)must have prompted D)should have prompted
                                                       E)could prompt             
      17.                                                                         
        A)rather than    B)such as                                                
        C)thanks to      D)except for                                             
                                            21.                                   
                 E)along with                                                     
                                              A)oppressed      B)neglected        
                                              C)prohibited     D)convinced        
                                                                                  
                                                       E)deterred                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      18.                                                                         
        A)on             B)with                                                   
                                                                                  
        C)for            D)over                                                   
                                                                                  
                 E)against                                                        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 7 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
          22-26: For these questions, choose the best                             
          word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24.                        
          passage.                                                                
                                              A)have developed B)were developing  
        The snake is one of the most emblematic creatures in C)had developed D)would develop
        human mythology, and is perceived to represent both                       
        wisdom and evil. Indian mythology considers snakes to E)are developing    
        be the ‘bringers of life’, (22)---- the Bible tells the story of          
        a snake as the first deceiver. Snakes’ most (23)----                      
        characteristic is their lack of limbs, so they move with a                
        slithering motion. As they hunt other animals, they                       
        (24)---- a keen sense of smell and the ability to sense                   
        vibrations and temperature variations. To kill their prey,                
        venomous snakes use their long and sharp teeth to                         
        inject a paralysing or deadly nerve venom (25)---- their                  
        specialised salivary glands, where the venom is stored.                   
        They can unhinge their jaws to swallow large prey.                        
                                            25.                                   
        (26)---- growing continuously, snakes shed their skin by                  
        detaching the outermost layer.        A)for            B)over             
                                              C)from           D)on               
                                                       E)to                       
      22.                                                                         
        A)once           B)while                                                  
        C)otherwise      D)because                                                
                                                                                  
                 E)therefore                                                      
                                            26.                                   
                                              A)Except for     B)Similar to       
                                              C)With the help of D)In spite of    
                                                                                  
                                                       E)As a result of           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      23.                                                                         
        A)sceptical      B)tolerable                                              
                                                                                  
        C)variable       D)prominent                                              
                 E)misleading                                                     
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 8 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          27-36: For these questions, choose the best                             
                                            29. ----, the diseases which were also brought posed
         option to complete the given sentence.                                   
                                              serious challenges to their way of life.
                                              A) Given that the Native Americans were initially
                                                hospitable to the European settlers
      27. Even though some studies suggest that exposure to                       
        the blue light emitted by digital devices could be a                      
                                              B) Although the Native Americans benefited from access
        risk factor for developing certain eye conditions, ----. to new technology and trade came with the early
        A) it has also been revealed that long hours of screen European settlers  
          time may trigger headaches                                              
                                              C)Since the Native Americans had customs and culture
        B) most parents worry that digital devices can ruin their which were totally different from those of the European
                                                immigrants                        
          children’s eyesight                                                     
                                              D)Because the Native Americans were aware of the
        C)many scientists think that the evidence to support this                 
                                                early settlers’ thirst for land and wealth
          claim is not very strong                                                
                                              E) Even though the Native Americans and European
        D)there are other eye issues that our screens can bring                   
                                                immigrants had difficulties in communication due to
          on, such as dry or tired eyes                                           
                                                language problems                 
        E) some companies are marketing special glasses that                      
          protect our eyes from the blue light                                    
                                            30. Although many people equate creativity with
                                              intelligence, ----.                 
      28. While Willis Carrier, who was among the most A) creativity is a critical aspect of a person’s life, starting
        relentless researchers and promoters of air from inside the womb onward through adulthood
        conditioning, is known as the father of air                               
                                              B) a child’s creativity can be either strongly encouraged
        conditioning, ----.                                                       
                                                or discouraged by early experiences at home
        A) the range of processes and products involved in air                    
          conditioning cannot be attributed to a single person C)the two terms are not synonymous, and it is not
                                                necessary to have a genius-level IQ to be creative
        B) for centuries, ice and water had been manipulated to                   
          cool air circulating in theatres, hospitals, and factories D)standard intelligence tests measure convergent
                                                thinking, which is the ability to come up with a single
        C)air conditioning began to be marketed as a comfort correct answer       
          device for domestic consumption during the 1930s                        
                                              E) creative individuals tend to share certain
        D)the development of industrial air conditioning characteristics, including a tendency to be more
          dominated the newly created industry at the beginning impulsive or spontaneous
          of the 20th century                                                     
        E) technologies were being developed in the refrigeration                 
          industry contemporaneously with Carrier’s work in                       
          humidification                                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 9 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      31. Since virtually all cultures on earth have some form 33. The literature on treatment for learning disabilities
        of fortune-telling, ----.             primarily discusses school-based treatments, ----.
        A) most people are no longer curious about what their A) though individuals with learning disabilities experience
          future will bring to them             challenges beyond such settings   
        B) it is an incomprehensible temptation to get information B) because such endeavours do not guarantee that a
          about what awaits us in the future    specific treatment will be effective
                                                                                  
        C)it would be somewhat undesirable for a person to C)so treatments without widespread research support
          know what is ahead in the future      may not turn out to be successful 
        D)the desire to predict what will happen in the future can D)if we treat individuals with learning disabilities through
          be a permanent feature of the human mind methods they prefer            
        E) it is considered to be a science by some, whereas E) while defining learning disabilities is as important as
          others claim that it is nothing more than speculation conducting research on treatments
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      32. Most people have experienced foodborne illness ----. 34. In our rapidly changing world, parents’ skills may
        A) given that those working in the field of food safety are easily become obsolete, ----.
          most concerned about microbial foodborne illness A) though children sometimes look to their peers rather
                                                than their parents for guidance and approval
        B) because ensuring the safety of food is a shared                        
          responsibility among producers, industry, government, B) as family-centred learning plays a key role in
          and consumers                         equipping children with social, cultural and moral
                                                values                            
        C)although current estimates of foodborne illness in the                  
          United States are 325,000 hospitalisations, and C)while they might have difficulty in transmitting their
          around 5,000 deaths per year          accumulated knowledge to their children
        D)even though they might not recognise it as such,                        
                                              D)but their children’s taste in diet, music, clothes and
          instead blaming it on the stomach flu or a 24-hour bug                  
                                                entertainment can significantly differ from their own
                                                taste                             
        E) when a person consciously thinks about food safety                     
          before, during or after eating a meal E) so they could have fewer opportunities for direct
                                                influence over their children’s development
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 10 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                37-42: For these questions, choose the most
                                               accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in
      35. Hydroelectricity plants pose several threats to the                     
                                               English, and the most accurate English translation
        environment ----.                                                         
                                               of the sentences in Turkish.       
        A) while flooding is an important indicator for the                       
          environmental impact they cause                                         
                                            37. The Morse code, which is a milestone in long-range
        B) even though the proliferation of mosquitoes may communication, was designed so that telegraph
          disturb those living close to them  operators could communicate via electrical signals.
                                              A) Uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası olan Mors
        C)because they could lead to the extinction of endemic                    
                                                alfabesi, telgraf operatörlerinin elektrik sinyalleri
          species and block fish migration                                        
                                                aracılığıyla iletişim kurabilmeleri için tasarlanmıştır.
        D)although the loss of historical and archaeological B) Uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası olsa da
          heritage is a big concern             Mors alfabesi ilk olarak telgraf operatörlerinin elektrik
                                                sinyalleri yoluyla haberleşmeleri için tasarlanmıştır.
        E) so that they help communities harness water                            
          resources for energy generation     C)Telgraf operatörlerinin elektrik sinyalleri aracılığıyla
                                                iletişim kurması için tasarlanması, Mors alfabesini
                                                uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası hâline
                                                getirmiştir.                      
                                              D)Elektrik sinyalleri aracılığıyla telgraf operatörlerinin
                                                iletişim kurması için tasarlanan Mors alfabesi, uzun
                                                mesafe iletişimin dönüm noktasıdır.
      36. ----, they rely on each other for optimal performance, E) Uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası olan Mors
        which is a sign of concern for interdependence in alfabesinin tasarlanma sebebi, telgraf operatörlerinin
        groups.                                 elektrik sinyalleriyle iletişim kurabilmelerini sağlamaktı.
        A) Since some individuals are not attracted to group                      
          activities                                                              
        B) Because it is possible for individuals to do something                 
          they find distasteful                                                   
        C)Whenever members of a group come together to do a                       
          variety of tasks                                                        
        D)Although group support depends on members’                              
          willingness to take part                                                
        E) Whereas there is mutual interest between group                         
          members within social settings                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 11 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      38. Solving a series of incredibly difficult problems , the 39. Every child has an individual learning style, and they
        Wright brothers created a revolutionary new learn information best when it is delivered in a mode
        technology that changed the world in a way that suited to their style.    
        even they could not imagine.                                              
                                              A) Her çocuk kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekline sahiptir
        A) Wright kardeşler, kendilerinin bile hayal edemeyeceği ve çocuklar bilgiyi en iyi kendi tarzlarına uygun bir
          bir biçimde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim niteliğinde yeni biçimde verildiğinde öğrenir.
          bir teknoloji yaratarak inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi                 
          problemi çözmüşlerdir.              B) Kendine özgü öğrenme şekliyle her çocuk, bilgiyi en iyi
                                                kendi tarzına uygun bir biçimde verildiğinde öğrenir.
        B) Wright kardeşler, inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi                      
          problemi çözmüşler ve kendilerinin bile hayal C)Kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekli olan her çocuk,
          edemeyeceği bir biçimde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim öğrenme tarzına uygun verildiği takdirde bilgiyi en iyi
          niteliğinde yeni bir teknoloji yaratmışlardır. şekilde öğrenir.         
        C)Wright kardeşlerin inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi D)Her çocuk kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekline sahip
          problemi çözerek dünyayı değiştiren, devrim olduğu için bilgiyi en iyi kendi tarzına uygun bir
          niteliğinde yeni bir teknoloji yaratmaları, kendilerinin biçimde verildiğinde öğrenir.
          bile hayal edemeyeceği bir şeydi.                                       
                                              E) Her çocuk kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekline sahiptir
        D)Wright kardeşler, inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi ve onlar için bilgiyi öğrenmenin en iyi yolu, kendi
          problemi çözerek kendilerinin bile hayal edemeyeceği tarzlarına uygun olanıdır.
          bir şekilde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim niteliğinde yeni                 
          bir teknoloji yaratmışlardır.                                           
        E) Wright kardeşlerin kendilerinin bile hayal edemeyeceği                 
          bir biçimde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim niteliğinde yeni                 
          bir teknoloji yaratmak için yaptıkları şey, inanılmaz                   
          derecede zor bir dizi problemi çözmekti.                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 12 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      40. Gen terapisi çoğunlukla ender genetik bozuklukların 41. Sağlık okuryazarlığı, bireylerin sağlık konusunda
        tedavisinde faydalıdır; bunun aksine, mevcut uygun kararlar vermek için gerekli olan temel sağlık
        genlerin değiştirilmesini kapsayan gen düzeltme, bilgi ve hizmetlerini elde etme ve anlama
        çok daha fazla hastalığı tedavi eder. kapasitesine sahip olma derecesi olarak
                                              tanımlanabilir.                     
        A) Gene therapy is mainly useful for treating rare genetic                
          disorders, whereas gene-editing involves altering A) Health literacy can be defined as the degree to which
          existing genes and treating a wider range of individuals have the capacity to obtain and understand
          conditions.                           basic health information and services, and to make
                                                necessary health decisions in an appropriate way.
        B) Gene therapy mainly treats rare genetic disorders;                     
          gene-editing, on the other hand, involves the alteration B) Health literacy, which is required to make appropriate
          of the existing genes, which is useful for treating a health decisions, can be defined as the degree to
          wider range of conditions.            which individuals have the capacity to obtain and
                                                understand basic health information and services.
        C) Gene therapy is mainly useful for treating rare genetic                
          disorders; in contrast, gene-editing, which involves C)Defined as the degree to which individuals have the
          altering existing genes, treats a much wider range of capacity to obtain and understand basic health
          conditions.                           information and services, health literacy is necessary
                                                to make appropriate health decisions.
        D)Gene therapy is mainly used for the treatment of rare                   
          genetic disorders, but gene-editing can treat a much D)Health literacy can be defined as the degree to which
          wider range of disorders since it involves altering individuals have the capacity to obtain and understand
          existing genes.                       basic health information and services required to
                                                make appropriate health decisions.
        E) Gene therapy is mainly used to treat rare genetic                      
          disorders while gene-editing, which is the alteration of E) The degree to which individuals have the capacity to
          the existing genes, is involved in the treatment of a obtain and understand basic health information and
          wider range of conditions.            services needed to make health decisions
                                                appropriately can be defined as health literacy.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 13 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      42. Tüm vücut fonksiyonlarımızı senkronize eden iç                          
        saatimiz, ipuçlarını güneş ışığının gündüz-gece                           
        döngüsünden alır ve beyin bu 24 saatlik ritmi                             
        organlarımıza iletmek ve vücudumuza ne zaman                              
        uyumaya ve uyanmaya ihtiyaç duyduğunu bildirmek                           
        için sinirleri ve hormonları kullanır.                                    
        A) Our internal clock keeps all our body functions in sync                
          by taking its cues from the day-night cycle of sunlight,                
          and the brain transmits this 24-hour rhythm to our                      
          internal organs and tells our body when it needs to                     
          sleep and wake by using nerves and hormones.                            
        B) Our internal clock, which keeps all our body functions                 
          in sync, takes its cues from the day-night cycle of                     
          sunlight, and the brain uses nerves and hormones to                     
          transmit this 24-hour rhythm to our internal organs                     
          and to tell our body when it needs to sleep and wake.                   
        C)Our internal clock, by which all our body functions are                 
          kept in sync, takes its cues from the day-night cycle of                
          sunlight, and to transmit this 24-hour rhythm to our                    
          internal organs, the brain uses nerves and hormones,                    
          telling our body when it needs to sleep and wake.                       
        D)All our body functions are kept in sync by our internal                 
          clock, which takes its cues from the day-night cycle of                 
          sunlight, and the brain uses nerves and hormones to                     
          transmit this 24-hour rhythm to our internal organs and                 
          tells our body when to sleep and wake.                                  
        E) It is our internal clock that keeps all our body functions             
          in sync by taking cues from the day-night cycle of                      
          sunlight, and the brain uses nerves and hormones                        
          while transmitting this 24-hour rhythm to our internal                  
          organs, and tells our body when to sleep and wake.                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 14 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
          43-46: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    44. One can understand from the passage that our
                                              shortcuts ----.                     
                                              A) become less helpful in adulthood as we tend to ignore
        We are born to judge others by how they look: our them                    
        brains come hardwired with a specific face-processing                     
        area, and even shortly after birth, babies would rather B) are generally accompanied by careful assessments of
        look at a human face than anything else. Within their others              
        first year, they become more discerning, and are more                     
        likely to attend to friendly-looking faces than those who C)produce more beneficial results than they did in
        look serious. By the time we reach adulthood, we prehistoric times        
        develop a great number of stereotypes and become                          
        snap-judgement specialists, jumping to conclusions D)might be considered morally unacceptable although
        about a person’s character and status after seeing his or they can provide help in our social lives
        her face for just a tenth of a second. And we ignore                      
                                              E) are unreliable because each person can interpret such
        considered assessments of others in favour of simple                      
                                                traits as trustworthiness differently
        cognitive shortcuts. For example, we judge a baby-faced                   
        individual as more trustworthy, associate a chiselled jaw                 
        with dominance, or refer to a person with a big nose as                   
        a curious one. Unfair or unethical, it may be, but it                     
        makes good evolutionary sense. Ours is an ultra-social                    
        species, so being able to quickly assess whether                          
        someone is friend or foe and whether they have the                        
        power to help or hurt us is important survival 45. How does Todorov explain why our shortcuts
        information. But there is a problem. As psychologist sometimes do not provide help?
        Alexander Todorov of Princeton University points out, A) He states that our shortcuts lead us to make very
        more often than not, our first impressions are wrong; quick assessments of others, and therefore our first
        that is, relying on our shortcuts may not always produce impressions are usually wrong.
        good results. It is not clear why, but he suggests that we                
        meet many more strangers than our prehistoric B) He believes that unlike our prehistoric ancestors, we
        ancestors would have, and this may play a role. do not live in a hazardous world, so we do not need to
                                                develop shortcuts to survive.     
                                              C)He thinks that we encounter so many faces in our
                                                modern world that our shortcuts may not guide us
                                                accurately.                       
      43. Which could be inferred from the passage about our                      
                                              D)He claims that we live in a more complex world, which
        face-based judgements?                                                    
                                                requires us to rely on detailed assessments rather
        A) Babies cannot make judgements concerning human than simple shortcuts.  
          faces because they are not yet capable of                               
          discriminating between different faces. E) He puts forward that our shortcuts are mostly based
                                                on people’s facial characteristics, so they cannot
        B) We begin to make assumptions about a person’s provide precise information.
          character or status after we have seen his or her face                  
          several times.                                                          
        C)We are innately predisposed to form an idea about a                     
          person just by looking at his or her face.                              
        D)The face-processing area in our brains functions more                   
          effectively during infancy than it does in our adult                    
          years.                                                                  
        E) Regardless of how they look, all human faces can                       
          attract babies’ attention within their first year.                      
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 15 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      46. Which could be the best title for this passage?                         
        A) Learning Survival Information from Our Ancestors                       
                                                                                  
        B) Major Drawbacks of Our Cognitive Shortcuts                             
        C)How to Reject Unethical Stereotypes                                     
                                                                                  
        D)Transferring Our Cognitive Shortcuts into Adulthood                     
                                                                                  
        E) Our Strong Tendency to Stereotype People                               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 16 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
          47-50: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    48. Which of the following can be inferred from the
                                              passage about the relationship between needs and
                                              purchases?                          
        Consumer psychology is the study of the behaviour of A) Advertisers should take into account what consumers
        consumers of goods and services regarding their buying need, irrespective of what they desire, in order to
        patterns and reactions to advertising and marketing. It persuade them to buy particular products.
        seeks to explain consumer behaviour in two basic ways:                    
                                              B) Consumers are overwhelmed by their inner voice
        what the consumer wants and what the consumer                             
                                                telling them to buy what they need rather than what
        needs. The logical explanation for fulfilling the needs is                
                                                they want.                        
        a simple one. If a person lives in New York, that person                  
        needs a winter coat to survive the cold outside. But why                  
                                              C)Economic factors far outweigh psychological ones
        the person buys a particular style or colour depends on                   
                                                when it comes to purchases based on fundamental
        the more complex issues of why a particular choice is                     
                                                needs.                            
        made. The key to unlocking consumer psychology is                         
        understanding that desires rule over needs when it                        
                                              D)Although needs intervene in consumer purchase, they
        comes to consumer purchase. In our modern world                           
                                                fall short in accounting for the details of the choices
        where new food products and electronic gadgets                            
                                                consumers make.                   
        emerge daily, it is in the interest of psychologists, as                  
        well as those marketing the products, to understand the E) Advertisers should acknowledge that the battle
        relationship between financial and psychological factors between desires and needs usually ends in the victory
        that make people buy what they buy. In fact, consumer of the latter.      
        psychology utilises more than simply psychology,                          
        because it also studies economics and culture.                            
                                            49. It can be inferred from the passage that in order to
      47. Which of the following does consumer psychology better understand consumer psychology, one
        deal with?                            should ----.                        
        A) What marketers can do to effectively reach out to A) consider that there are several factors at play when
          potential customers                   examining consumers’ buying habits
        B) The challenge experienced by psychologists to B) study financial factors rather than psychological ones
          understand consumer behaviour         that play a key role in advertising a product
        C)How basic requirements and desires influence C)concentrate more on seemingly rational reasons rather
          consumer behaviour                    than superficial ones in buying decisions
        D)Whether certain goods and services chosen by D)pay special attention to the fact that advertisers often
          consumers satisfy them or not         try to persuade people to buy what they actually do not
                                                need                              
        E) How to help consumers avoid the conflict of needs and                  
          desires when making a purchase      E) realise that consumers often tend to buy what they
                                                need rather than what they desire 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 17 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      50. What is the main purpose of the passage?                                
        A) To analyse people’s buying habits from an economic                     
          viewpoint                                                               
        B) To highlight the huge number of products consumers                     
          are offered                                                             
                                                                                  
        C)To stress the significant effect of advertising on                      
          consumer psychology                                                     
        D)To describe the change in consumer psychology in the                    
          modern world                                                            
        E) To explain what consumer psychology does to                            
          understand consumer behaviour                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 18 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
          51-54: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    52. Which of the following is given as a feature of
                                              broomrape?                          
                                              A) It provides energy for many nearby plants thanks to its
        All plants can survive for short periods without light. roots that harness sunlight.
        Obviously, they need to be able to last through the                       
        night, but they can also cope with a longer darkness in B) It can photosynthesise only when it is connected to
        an emergency. If you leave a tent pitched on the same another plant.      
        patch of lawn, the grass underneath turns yellow and                      
        spindly. This is an adaptation, called etiolation, which C)It cannot feed itself without attaching to a plant that
        focuses the plant’s remaining resources into growing as photosynthesises. 
        far as possible to try and reach sunlight again. There                    
                                              D)It never depends on sunlight to harness energy thanks
        are also some plants that have lost the power of                          
        photosynthesis altogether. The genus Orobanche to its adaptation skill.   
        (commonly known as ‘broomrape’) is an example. The                        
                                              E) All the nutrients it gets are used up by the host plant it
        plants have no chlorophyll and get all their nutrients by                 
                                                is attached to.                   
        parasitically attaching to the roots of nearby plants                     
        instead. Although broomrape does not harness sunlight                     
        itself, it is still indirectly reliant on the sun to provide              
        energy to its host plant. Some other parasitic plants,                    
        called mycoheterotrophs, feed on fungi and these could                    
        theoretically survive in complete darkness for months or                  
        even years. But of course, those fungi in turn get their                  
        energy by digesting dead plants, and in a permanently 53. Which of the following is clearly stated about the
        dark world, this food source would eventually run out. survival mechanism of mycoheterotrophs?
                                              A) Their source of energy is limited to the amount of dead
                                                plants in their habitat.          
                                              B) They mainly depend on direct and permanent sunlight
                                                to survive.                       
      51. What can be understood about the adaptation                             
        process of plants?                    C)They physically attach to fungi to help them digest
                                                dead plants.                      
        A) They tend to use their remaining energy in an attempt                  
          to access sunlight.                                                     
                                              D)They are heavily exploited by parasitic plants such as
                                                fungi to harness energy.          
        B) They are not really affected by permanent darkness                     
          due to etiolation.                                                      
                                              E) The longer their habitat is in darkness, the stronger
                                                their survival skill gets.        
        C)Even short periods of darkness cause plants to lose                     
          their ability to adapt.                                                 
        D)Some plants such as grass are more adaptable to                         
          darkness than others.                                                   
        E) They adjust to complete darkness by using up all their                 
          energy, so they no longer need photosynthesis.                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 19 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      54. What is the main idea of the passage?                                   
        A) All plants need one another to store energy and                        
          produce food.                                                           
        B) Plants can adapt to darkness, but none of them can                     
          live forever without sunlight.                                          
                                                                                  
        C)The sun is the eternal source of energy for living                      
          beings on our planet.                                                   
        D)Nature has so many defects that it is difficult for us to               
          make up for all of them.                                                
        E) Darkness makes some plant species more susceptible                     
          to parasites.                                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 20 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
          55-58: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    56. Which could be inferred from the passage?
                                              A) Throughout Europe, 359 plant species have been
                                                found to show the symptoms of Pierce’s disease.
        Some 150 years after the Great French Wine Blight,                        
                                              B) Although Pierce’s disease affects a lot of plants in
        European vines – climbing plants that produce grapes                      
                                                Europe, it only develops in vines in the Americas.
        – are under threat from a disease that originated in the                  
        Americas. A bacterium known as Xyllella fastidiosa                        
                                              C)California has been unable to cope with the insects
        causes Pierce’s disease, in which the plants’ transport                   
                                                that transmit X. fastidiosa, which has destroyed the
        vessels become blocked, cutting the supply of water                       
                                                wine industry.                    
        and nutrients to the leaves. California’s Department of                   
        Food and Agriculture spends about $40 million a year to                   
                                              D)The impact of X. fastidiosa is far-reaching when the
        control the leaf-hopping insects that carry the bacteria                  
        from plant to plant in that region. Without this variety of infected plant species is considered.
        expenditure, the annual cost to the wine industry could                   
                                              E) Southern Italy is known to be the place where Pierce’s
        be up to $250 million. The bacterium does not just hit                    
                                                disease appeared for the first time.
        vines – in the Americas, it also strikes citrus and coffee                
        plants. Now X. fastidiosa has reached Europe, where it                    
        has earned another name – the ‘Ebola of olive trees’. In                  
        2013, it was spotted in a few olive trees in southern                     
        Italy, and by 2015 had infected up to a million trees                     
        there with what has become known as olive quick                           
        decline syndrome. So far, 359 plant species in Europe                     
        have been identified as being vulnerable to X. 57. Which of the following conclusions could be drawn
        fastidiosa, including peaches, lavender and rosemary. from the passage?   
        Some show no symptoms, acting as reservoirs for the A) Agricultural damage from Pierce’s disease peaks in
        bacteria. Others dry and die quickly. Short of controlling winter months across Europe.
        insect species that could spread the disease, no cure is                  
        yet known. Generally cold winters slow the spread of B) Why plant species die soon after they catch Pierce’s
        Pierce’s disease; however, as the planet warms, there is disease has not been revealed yet.
        every chance the disease’s ranges could increase.                         
                                              C)Most plant species infected with X. fastidiosa show
                                                typical symptoms of Pierce’s disease.
                                              D)High temperatures may increase the speed at which
                                                Pierce’s disease is spreading.    
      55. One can understand from the passage that Pierce’s                       
        disease ----.                         E) Plants with Pierce’s disease can be cured by
        A) originated in the Americas in 2013, killing many plant supplying adequate water and nutrients to their leaves.
          species                                                                 
        B) has already devastated the wine industry both in the                   
          Americas and Europe                                                     
        C)causes the leaves of a plant to be deprived of                          
          necessary ingredients                                                   
        D)is spread by a bacterium that absorbs water and                         
          nutrients in the leaves of a plant                                      
        E) has caused more damage in Europe than the Great                        
          French Wine Blight did                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 21 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      58. What is the primary purpose of the author?                              
        A) To emphasise the great amount of money spent to                        
          protect the wine industry against Pierce’s disease                      
        B) To point out the serious danger Pierce’s disease                       
          poses to various plant species                                          
                                                                                  
        C)To explain why X. fastidiosa is called the ‘Ebola of                    
          olive trees’ in Europe                                                  
        D)To warn that insects carrying X. fastidiosa increase in                 
          number as the planet warms                                              
        E) To draw attention to the fact that a cure to eradicate                 
          Pierce’s disease is to arrive shortly                                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 22 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
          59-62: Answer these questions according to the                          
          passage below.                    60. To find the world’s best 100-plus sportsperson,
                                              Lepers and his colleagues ----.     
                                              A) checked whether a centenarian athlete was able to
        Do you think you are too old to do sport? Think again. break the world record in his or her discipline in the
        An analysis of the world’s oldest record-breakers has past                
        named 104-year-old cyclist Robert Marchand as                             
                                              B) examined the most successful performances by
        champion. Romuald Lepers at the University of                             
                                                100-plus athletes and compared them with each other
        Burgundy, in Dijon, France, and his colleagues have                       
        investigated how age affects athletic performance.                        
                                              C)looked at the differences between centenarians’
        While looking at middle-aged athletes, the team began                     
                                                performances and those of the world record holders
        to wonder who the world’s best 100-plus sportsperson                      
        might be. They identified all the best performances by                    
                                              D)asked the world record holders in athletics, swimming
        centenarians in athletics, swimming and cycling. Then                     
                                                and cycling to lay out selection criteria
        they compared each athlete with the world record holder                   
        in their discipline. The centenarian athlete who showed                   
                                              E) compared the performances of centenarian athletes
        the smallest decline was Frenchman Robert Marchand.                       
                                                with those of the middle-aged athletes
        Cycling 26.93 kilometres in 1 hour, Marchand was only                     
        50.6 percent slower than Bradley Wiggins’s 54.53 km                       
        record. The study has also shown that athletic ability                    
        can be maintained until 35 to 40, and after that,                         
        performance decreases by about 10 percent per                             
        decade. But Marchand’s ability has declined much more                     
        slowly. Lepers says that Marchand has extraordinary                       
                                            61. It is clear from the passage that the decline in
        muscular and cardiorespiratory function for his age. His                  
        performance corresponds to an age-related decline of Marchand’s athletic ability ----.
        less than 8 percent per decade. Lepers suggests that A) has been far slower thanks to his exceptional physical
        these athletes are not only remarkable biological characteristics         
        examples, but they could also be good role models for                     
        others to follow. “Take Canadian Ed Withlock,” he says. B) has been found to be by 8 to 10 percent per decade
        Withlock was the first person over 70 to run a marathon                   
        in less than 3 hours. He took up running in his 40s. “It’s C)has allowed him to be a great inspiration to the
        never too late to be active,” says Lepers. athletes under 40              
                                              D)has been less sharp than the decrease in Bradley
                                                Wiggins’s athletic ability        
                                              E) has been occurring at a rapid pace due to his
      59. What was the initial aim of the study conducted by weakening bodily functions
        Lepers and his colleagues?                                                
        A) To show that old people can also display excellent                     
          performance in several sports                                           
        B) To explain how world record holders in different sports                
          achieved extraordianary success                                         
        C)To find out when athletic performance begins to                         
          decline dramatically                                                    
        D)To study the relation between age and athletic                          
          performance in middle-aged sportspeople                                 
        E) To discover what distinguishes Robert Marchand from                    
          other 100-plus sportspeople                                             
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 23 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      62. Why does Lepers put a special emphasis on                               
        Withlock’s performance?                                                   
        A) To suggest that 3 hours is not sufficient for a 70-plus                
          athlete to run a marathon                                               
        B) To show that marathons are races where we can see                      
          powerful athletes over 70                                               
                                                                                  
        C)To stress that an athlete must be a record-breaker to                   
          gain worldwide recognition                                              
        D)To prove that Withlock was a more successful                            
          sportsperson than Marchand                                              
        E) To indicate that one could be a brilliant sportsperson                 
          at any age                                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 24 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          63-67: For these questions, choose the best                             
                                            64. Debby:                            
         option to complete the dialogue.                                         
                                               I was recently offered a job at a different firm with
                                                a higher salary. I feel as if I’m at a crossroads in
                                                my career. I’ll have to make a decision soon.
      63. Johanna:                                                                
         Today, our psychology professor talked about a Lucy:                    
          biological process called 'neuroplasticity'. He said  ----             
          that even the adult brain can grow new brain cells                      
          in response to new experiences.     Debby:                              
                                               I love my job and the team, but I feel the company
        Stan:                                   is asking too much of me.         
         ----                                                                    
                                              Lucy:                               
        Johanna:                               I think you’ll easily get used to working with a new
         Yeah, he said the exact same thing. I’d never team. And this change will be to your advantage.
          thought of them as being beneficial at all. I used You know it’s much easier to set your limits at the
          to think they only cause aggressive behaviour and beginning. If you do so, I’m sure you'll manage
          addiction.                            your professional life more easily.
                                              A) What stops you from negotiating a better deal with
        Stan:                                                                     
                                                your current employer?            
         Well, apparently some scientists still have those                       
          fears, but it all depends on how effectively you                        
                                              B) Until now you seemed really happy with your current
          use them.                                                               
                                                job. What’s the problem?          
        A) Such as playing action video games? I remember                         
          reading that they help the brain and improve cognitive C)I know it’s quite challenging. What’s attractive about
          skills.                               the new offer?                    
        B) That's really interesting. I’ve always thought that the D)You’ve always dreamed of working in a big company.
          human brain couldn’t grow new cells after a certain Why would you let yourself miss such an opportunity?
          age.                                                                    
                                              E) Do you think you’ve practised building appropriate
        C)Did he say what kind of experiences? I’ve been boundaries in your professional life?
          playing chess for years hoping that it’ll give me a                     
          cognitive advantage at school.                                          
        D)I’ve seen scientists trying it with patients suffering from             
          Alzheimer's disease to prevent them from losing                         
          cognitive skills.                                                       
        E) But, don’t forget that outdoor games are more useful                   
          and educational than indoor games, no matter how                        
          entertaining they are.                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 25 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      65. Daisy:                            66. Kelsey:                           
         Last week, I was in a situation where things went  Now, more and more experts are complaining
          from bad to worse. I failed to meet my end-of-year about modern parenting styles. They say parents
          targets at work, the central heating system in my try to create an image of success that has little to
          apartment broke, and my car was hit by an do with their childen’s desires, talents or needs.
          unknown car. All these happened in the same                             
          week!                               Jill:                               
                                               ----                              
        Sally:                                                                    
         Terrible! How do you keep calm in such Kelsey:                          
          situations?                          Actually, this makes children less independent.
                                                They always feel the need to meet their parents’
        Daisy:                                  wishes and ask them what to do in their lives.
         ----                                                                    
                                              Jill:                               
        Sally:                                 So, overparenting may prevent children from
         What do you do with that information? building self-confidence and gaining the ability to
                                                adapt to an unpredictable world.  
        Daisy:                                                                    
                                              A) Parents tend to bring up their children as they were
         I look at the list and focus on the ones I can do                       
                                                raised in the past, but it’s really difficult in this
          something about. Then I think about the actions                         
                                                ever-changing world.              
          I can take, including asking for help if necessary.                     
                                              B) I think every child has a special talent, but it may
        A) I can think and worry about many things at the same                    
                                                remain undiscovered unless their parents help them
          time, but when I’m in the action phase, I try to avoid                  
                                                recognise themselves.             
          that.                                                                   
                                              C)That’s true. They want to sculpt their kids into a
        B) The truth is, it’s hard not to lose it in these moments. I             
                                                particular kind of adult, stressing them with endless
          may end up giving up because of the never-ending list                   
                                                schedules and heavy expectations. 
          of problems.                                                            
                                              D)I agree that parents should offer advice to their kids
        C)I write everything down. I draw a line, and on the left I               
                                                about their future plans, but they shouldn’t forget to
          put down all the problems, and on the right what to do                  
                                                understand their wishes too.      
          about those problems.                                                   
                                              E) In today’s world, parents are bombarded with
        D)In my experience, the easiest way to keep calm is to                    
                                                information from books and experts, so they can’t
          regain control of the situation by collecting information               
                                                often decide how to contribute to their children’s
          from as many people as possible.                                        
                                                success.                          
        E) No matter how bad things are, keeping my calm                          
          always helps me come up with a possible solution. I                     
          keep saying “This too shall pass”.                                      
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 26 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                68-71: For these questions, choose the best
      67. Robert:                                                                 
                                               rephrased form of the given sentence.
         The article I read this morning says whales stop                        
          singing when ships are nearby.                                          
        Leonie:                             68. Lightning sensors can pinpoint lightning strikes and
         ----                                provide initial attack crews with accurate locations;
                                              however, there are too many strikes to check them
        Robert:                               all, and not every strike results in a fire.
         It said that they used two underwater recorders to                      
                                              A) Although there are too many lightning strikes to check,
          capture their singing in a remote area where a                          
                                                and not all lead to a fire, lightning sensors are effective
          cargo liner was the only large ship around, and                         
                                                at detecting them and giving initial attack crews
          they found that whales within 500 metres of the                         
                                                precise locations.                
          ship when it passed tended to stop singing.                             
                                              B) There are too many lightning strikes to be checked,
        Leonie:                                 most of which do not cause a fire, but lightning
         So, it’s obvious that for some reason shipping sensors help initial attack crews identify them and find
          interferes with whale songs.          the precise locations.            
        A) Does the article say which kind of whales were                         
                                              C)It is impossible to check all lightning strikes that cause
          examined in their research?                                             
                                                a fire as there are too many of them; nevertheless,
                                                lightning sensors can provide specific locations so that
        B) How did researchers observe the whales’ response to                    
                                                initial attack crews can check them.
          shipping noise?                                                         
                                              D)Lightning sensors can identify lightning strikes and
        C)Do researchers think that whales feel threatened and                    
                                                help to cope with fires through providing initial attack
          try to remain undetected?                                               
                                                crews with the exact location, though it is not easy to
                                                check them all since there are too many strikes.
        D)Then, how do whales communicate with each other                         
          when they don’t sing?                                                   
                                              E) Lightning sensors detect so many fires caused by
                                                lightning strikes that even if they show initial attack
        E) Why does shipping noise have a considerable impact                     
                                                crews the exact location of these strikes, it is not easy
          on whale behaviour?                                                     
                                                to check them all.                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 27 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      69. The birthday cake tradition in the United States is 70. People had long known of petroleum, but there
        little more than a century old, but the relationship of seemed to be little commercial use until 1853 when
        cakes and celebration has a much longer history. Samuel Kier began using it to make kerosene, a
                                              cheap substitute for the whale oil commonly used in
        A) People in the United States have been traditionally                    
                                              lamps.                              
          celebrating birthdays with cakes for a long time since                  
          the two concepts were linked to each other around a A) The development of kerosene in 1853 by Samuel Kier
          century ago.                          as an economical alternative to whale oil for lamps
                                                was not the first commercial use of petroleum because
        B) It was thanks to the emergence of the birthday cake                    
                                                people had known about it for so long, but it was the
          tradition in the United States less than a century ago                  
                                                most commercially successful enterprise.
          that the enduring relationship between cakes and                        
          celebration was established.                                            
                                              B) Though being known for a long time, petroleum did not
                                                seem to be much commercial until Samuel Kier
        C)Despite the interconnection between cakes and                           
                                                developed it into kerosene in 1853 – a cheaper
          celebration, it was not until a little more than a century              
                                                alternative to the whale oil commonly used in lamps.
          ago that people in the United States began to                           
          celebrate birthdays with cakes.                                         
                                              C)Although most people had long known about the
                                                commercial uses of petroleum, there was little
        D)Although the birthday cake tradition in the United                      
                                                development of the substance until 1853 when
          States has a history of slightly more than a century,                   
                                                Samuel Kier started using it to make kerosene and
          cakes and celebration have been associated with each                    
                                                marketing it as a cheaper substitute for the whale oil
          other for a considerably longer time.                                   
                                                commonly used in lamps.           
        E) Until a little more than a century ago, people in the                  
                                              D)It was in 1853 that petroleum – a substance which
          United States celebrated birthdays with cakes, but the                  
                                                people had long known about but did not seem to
          traditional connection between cakes and celebration                    
                                                have much interest in – was used commercially for the
          is a bit older than that.                                               
                                                first time by Samuel Kier to make kerosene, which was
                                                a more economical substitute to power lamps than the
                                                commonly used whale oil.          
                                              E) In 1853, as the need for a more economical alternative
                                                to whale oil to power lamps arose, Samuel Kier saw an
                                                opportunity to make kerosene from petroleum – a
                                                substance long known for both its history and
                                                commercial uses.                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 28 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                72-75: For these questions, choose the best
      71. Ageing is a complicated process, involving DNA option to complete the missing part of the
        damage, chronic inflammation, and worn-out cells, passage.                
        but we do not yet know which of these has the                             
        biggest impact on ageing.                                                 
                                            72. ---- Yet even today, when objective evidence is
        A) The combination of DNA damage, chronic                                 
                                              valued highly, most people would admit to secretly
          inflammation and worn-out cells affects ageing to                       
                                              cherishing one, or two, or many superstitions.
          unknown extents, making it a complicated process.                       
                                              Across America, tens of thousands of lottery tickets
        B) Because ageing is a complex process, the relationship are pencilled in every day based on nothing more or
          between ageing and resultant effects of DNA damage, less than people's lucky numbers. Though we now
          chronic inflammation and worn-out cells is largely have scientific explanations for a number of
          unknown.                            once-mysterious phenomena, daily life still holds
                                              enough unpredictability that we turn to superstitions
        C)As a complex process, ageing includes DNA damage, to account for the implausible.
          chronic inflammation and worn-out cells, though it is                   
                                              A) Bad-luck superstitions still keep many people from
          not clear which affects the ageing process the most.                    
                                                walking under a ladder, opening an umbrella indoors,
        D)Ageing, which itself is a complicated process, or boarding an airplane on Friday the thirteenth.
          damages DNA, causes chronic inflammation and                            
                                              B) Scientific studies reveal that most of the superstitious
          wears out cells; however, we do not yet know which                      
                                                beliefs we inherit involve ways to protect ourselves
          symptom is triggered by ageing the most.                                
                                                from evil.                        
        E) Ageing is characterised by damaged DNA, chronic                        
                                              C)Archaeologists identify Neanderthal man, who roamed
          inflammation and worn-out cells, but which one of                       
                                                throughout Western Asia 50,000 years ago, as having
          these makes the process more complicated is yet to                      
                                                produced the first superstitious belief.
          be determined.                                                          
                                              D)Superstitious beliefs, given their irrational nature,
                                                should have receded with the arrival of education and
                                                the advent of science.            
                                              E) Supernatural beliefs come into being when particular
                                                events happen in a way that cannot be explained by
                                                reason and are followed by superstitions to help
                                                control them.                     
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 29 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      73. Braille is a tactile (touch-based) system of written 74. Gothic is the style of architecture and art that
        language that features patterns of raised dots to succeeded Romanesque and prevailed in Europe
        represent letters of the alphabet, common words from the mid-12th century to the 16th century. Like
        and contractions, mathematical symbols, and many other stylistic labels, the word was originally a
        punctuation. Named after its developer, Louis term of abuse. It was coined by Italian artists of the
        Braille, braille allows people who are blind to read Renaissance to denote the type of medieval
        and, with adaptive technology, to write. ---- Learning architecture they condemned as barbaric. ---- None
        each of the different forms of braille code is like of these features was first used in the Gothic period,
        learning a new language. Therefore, most people but when employed together they created a new
        only learn the one or two of those they are most type of skeletal structure and a sense of graceful
        likely to use in their daily lives.   resilience that was very different in spirit from the
                                              massive solidity of Romanesque buildings.
        A) People whose vision is still intact can also learn                     
          braille, and should if they have regular interactions A) The Gothic style is still characterised chiefly in terms
          with people who are blind.            of architecture – in particular by the use of pointed
                                                arches, rib vaults, and flying buttresses.
        B) There are a number of braille variations in common                     
          use in the US, including braille specific to music, B) The term ‘Gothic’ has also been applied to the
          mathematics, science, and computer programming. ornament, sculpture, and painting of the period in
                                                which Gothic architecture flourished.
        C)Many communities have schools and consultants who                       
          teach braille as well as libraries that provide braille C)A swaying elegance is often considered typical of
          publications.                         Gothic figures, which are generally more naturalistic
                                                and less remote than those of the Romanesque
        D)Nemeth braille code provides a mix of American                          
                                                period.                           
          literary braille, Nemeth braille, and unique symbols for                
          instruction documentation.          D)This architecture was not created by the Gothic tribes
                                                who had destroyed the classical art of the Roman
        E) American literary braille code uses about 250 patterns                 
                                                Empire.                           
          to create book-length materials using short-form                        
          words, contractions, and single-cell words. E) However, the movement became more serious in tone
                                                and developed into a major strand in art.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 30 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant
      75. The fossil record of dinosaurs in Africa extends                        
                                               sentence in the passage.           
        from the Late Triassic Period, over 200 million years                     
        ago, until the Late Cretaceous Period, presumably                         
        65 million years ago. However, the extinction event                       
        that ended the reign of dinosaurs has yet to be 76. (I) Science that presents an organised view of the
        documented. Throughout this length of time, Africa universe developed with the rise of Greek civilisation,
        remained relatively stable geologically, changing starting about 600 BC. (II) Scholars from the Egyptian
                                              and Mesopotamian civilisations already had learned
        position only slightly by drifting and rotating                           
                                              many scientific results before the start of Greek
        northward. ---- The changing geography of Africa                          
                                              civilisation. (III) The Greeks developed institutions, such
        and its neighbours throughout the Mesozoic Period                         
                                              as the Academy, the Lyceum, and the Museum, that
        is fundamental to understanding the dinosaur                              
                                              pursued science in somewhat the way the universities
        fossils found there.                                                      
                                              do today. (IV)When the Academy and Lyceum were
        A) During the Late Triassic through the Early Jurassic, closed, and the Museum was destroyed, the Greek era
          major continental land masses were united into the in science was over. (V) This period, from the birth
          supercontinent of Pangaea.          of Western civilisation in Europe to the start of what is
                                              often called the Dark Ages, can be termed 'Antiquity'.
        B) Late Triassic dinosaur sites are found extensively in                  
          southern Africa (particularly South Africa, Lesotho, and A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V
          Zimbabwe) and to a lesser extent in northern Africa                     
          (Morocco).                                                              
        C)Thus, the dinosaur fauna of the Late Triassic and                       
          Early Jurassic are generally similar across the globe                   
          because there was only one continent rather than                        
          several continents.                                                     
        D)By contrast, the continents surrounding Africa moved 77. (I) The Magna Carta was a document written to satisfy
          greatly, resulting in ocean barriers between what were the grievances of England's barons and the Church by
          once contiguous land masses.        clearly defining their rights and responsibilities, as well
                                              as those of the King. (II) The agreement covered
        E) The boundary between the Triassic and Jurassic                         
                                              such topics as the giving of heirs in marriage, a widow's
          Period is marked by extinctions globally, but it has not                
                                              right to choose not to re-marry, and the handling of
          been studied in detail in Africa.                                       
                                              debts following a debtor's death. (III)Of particular note
                                              though were the promises that no free man would
                                              be imprisoned except by lawful justice, nor would they
                                              be denied the right to justice. (IV)The Magna Carta
                                              was written in medieval Latin and agreed to and sealed
                                              by King John in 1215. (V) There were also restrictions
                                              placed on the use of taxation by the King and his
                                              barons, including the formation of a council that could
                                              approve or reject proposed taxes.   
                                              A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V      
                                                                                  
                                                               Go on to the next page.
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 31 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
       2019-YDS/1/English                                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      78. (I)The world's reef systems face overwhelming                           
        stress – threats from overfishing, pollution and climate                  
        change being the main causes. (II) Most threatened is                     
        the Caribbean reef system, with more than 80 percent of                   
        its live coral cover having disappeared since the 1970s,                  
        largely due to global warming. (III) Coral has evolved a                  
        spectacular way of maximising its chances of survival.                    
        (IV) A visual example of the damage being done is coral                   
        bleaching, which turns coral from a natural pink shade                    
        to a ghostly white. (V) It is the result of warmer waters                 
        destroying the algae that give coral its usual colour.                    
        A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V                                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      79. (I)Allergies, like many conditions, tend to become worse                
        if a person is run-down, stressed, over-tired, has a poor                 
        diet, or does not get adequate exercise. (II) An allergy is               
        defined as a condition caused by an inappropriate or                      
        exaggerated reaction by the body’s immune system.                         
        (III)Harmless substances are misidentified by it as                       
        potentially dangerous, so the immune response is to                       
        form antibodies. (IV) These attack the perceived irritants                
        – or allergens – on the surface of the offending                          
        substance. (V) The reaction between antibodies and                        
        allergens stimulates the release of substances within                     
        the body, such as histamine, which cause a variety of                     
        irritating symptoms.                                                      
        A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V                                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
      80. (I)The voyages of discovery of the 15th and 16th                        
        centuries unveiled whole new worlds to the European                       
        eye, worlds full of new animals, plants and people.                       
        (II)The passage to new worlds was regarded by many                        
        as a commercial opportunity. (III) These new lands were                   
        rich in raw materials, which could be traded for                          
        manufactured goods. (IV)They also offered possibilities                   
        of settlement, and a number of countries began to plant                   
        their flags in distant parts of the globe. (V)The                         
        cultivation of sugar, tobacco and other crops on the                      
        plantations depended on slave labour.                                     
        A) I   B) II C)III  D)IV  E) V                                            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                 END OF THE TEST  
                                                             CHECK YOUR ANSWERS   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 32 ---

                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
          OSYM001                                                                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

--- PAGE 33 ---

                                                                                  
                      2019 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI - 1           
                                                                                  
                                     2019 - YDS/1                                 
                                                                                  
                                     24-03-2019                                   
                                                                                  
                         TEST OF ENGLISH     TEST OF ENGLISH                      
                              1. C               48. D                            
                              2. D               49. A                            
                                                                                  
                              3. D               50. E                            
                              4. D               51. A                            
                              5. E               52. C                            
                              6. B               53. A                            
                              7. D               54. B                            
                              8. D               55. C                            
                                                                                  
                              9. A               56. D                            
                             10. D               57. D                            
                             11. C               58. B                            
                             12. C               59. D                            
                             13. D               60. C                            
                             14. E               61. A                            
                                                                                  
                             15. C               62. E                            
                             16. B               63. A                            
                             17. C               64. B                            
                             18. E               65. C                            
                             19. B               66. C                            
                                                                                  
                             20. E               67. B                            
                             21. D               68. A                            
                             22. B               69. D                            
                             23. D               70. B                            
                             24. A               71. C                            
                             25. C               72. D                            
                                                                                  
                             26. E               73. B                            
                             27. C               74. A                            
                             28. A               75. D                            
                             29. B               76. B                            
                             30. C               77. D                            
                             31. D               78. C                            
                                                                                  
                             32. D               79. A                            
                             33. A               80. E                            
                             34. E                                                
                             35. C                                                
                             36. C                                                
                                                                                  
                             37. A                                                
                             38. D                                                
                             39. A                                                
                             40. C                                                
                             41. D                                                
                             42. B                                                
                                                                                  
                             43. C                                                
                             44. D                                                
                             45. C                                                
                             46. E                                                
                             47. C                                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  