1. Combat can lead to distress or even post-traumatic stress disorder, which is marked by extreme worry, re-experiencing of the event as well as ---- of things that remind one of the trauma.
A) allocation
B) assignment
C) avoidance
D) estimation
E) compensation

2. Established food companies employ food engineers and occasionally seek advice from food engineers and renowned gourmets to provide ---- that their products meet quality, safety, and regulatory standards.
A) fallacy
B) assurance
C) assumption
D) subtraction
E) consequence

3. By the end of the century, temperature-related health risks are expected to surpass those from air pollution for a fifth of the global population, highlighting the need for ---- measures to address this growing threat.
A) vague
B) explicit
C) instinctive
D) comprehensive
E) redundant

4. According to the findings of the recent surveys carried out globally, most countries around the world have failed to ---- protect the human rights of their citizens in the last quarter century.
A) adequately
B) haphazardly
C) exceedingly
D) ambiguously
E) hesitantly

5. Research shows that experiencing discrimination seems to ---- the process of ageing, which may be contributing to disease and early mortality as well as the increase in health disparities.
A) obscure
B) respond
C) accelerate
D) contain
E) moderate

6. Yersinia pestis is a bacterium responsible for a devastating disease called the Bubonic plague, which ---- a third of Europe’s population and caused millions of deaths around the world in the past.
A) dealt with
B) warded off
C) stemmed from
D) depended on
E) wiped out

7. Recent research suggests that socioeconomic inequality ---- reduced social mobility; however, policymakers ---- that a single reform can completely resolve the issue.
A) ought to be associated with / must not presume
B) would be associated with / might not presume
C) could be associated with / should not presume
D) might be associated with / would not presume
E) used to be associated with / cannot presume

8. A series of ancient drawings at a Palaeolithic site in Germany ---- to show marine animals caught in nets, which suggests that the use of this fishing technology ---- further than previously thought.
A) appear / may go back
B) appeared / had better go back
C) had appeared / could have gone back
D) would appear / must go back
E) has appeared / would go back

9. Any cell type from a donor can be turned into a pluripotent stem cell, which can be prompted ---- into any cell type of the body, including the specialised cells ---- the lung.
A) to have differentiated / to make up
B) to differentiate / making up
C) differentiating / to be made up
D) differentiated / having made up
E) to be differentiated / to be made up

10. Coral reefs, which evolved in the Triassic Period ---- 250 million years ago, rank ---- the most biodiverse habitats on Earth and are often referred to as the rainforests of the sea.
A) about / of
B) around / among
C) for / across
D) through / on
E) from / to

11. Breast tissue contains normal cells ---- genetic changes found in invasive breast cancers, which should guide approaches ---- early detection as it may lead physicians to mistakenly conclude that an individual has cancer.
A) along / off
B) in / by
C) with / to
D) from / towards
E) over / behind

12. For decades, the entertainment industry has prioritized white male perspectives, limiting the diversity of stories told; ----, audiences have been conditioned to associate authority, intelligence, and heroism with white male characters.
A) otherwise
B) instead
C) as a result
D) even so
E) in contrast

13. Research shows that children who are exposed to gambling-like content may be more vulnerable to gambling’s harms later in life; ----, some governments are determined to intervene early to safeguard children.
A) otherwise
B) for instance
C) similarly
D) therefore
E) in other words

14. It is now mandatory to use street view imagery in analysing urban environments; ----, traditional methods such as fieldwork or interviewing people could make the task more challenging, as these are not practical at all.
A) for instance
B) otherwise
C) instead
D) thus
E) accordingly

15. While browsing Wikipedia and discovering wholly new, ever-more fascinating related topics, you may go ---- far down the hole ---- it is difficult to piece together what brought you there to begin with.
A) either / or
B) as / as
C) neither / nor
D) so / that
E) the more / the less

16. New evidence reveals an increasing consensus that consciousness starts early, ---- previous theories that claim more cognitive development and brain maturation are needed for babies to become conscious.
A) by means of
B) such as
C) in contrast with
D) because of
E) in case of

17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage.

Those with more education tend to be healthier, smarter, and have better jobs and higher incomes than those with less education. However, whether prolonged education changes the brain structure over the long term and protects (17) ---- brain ageing, was still unknown. It is challenging to study this, because alongside education, many other factors influence brain structure, (18) ---- the conditions, DNA traits and environmental pollution. Nonetheless, researchers found an opportunity to examine the effects of an extra year of education. In 1972, a change in the law in the UK raised the number of mandatory school years from fifteen to sixteen, while all other circumstances remained (19) ----. This created an interesting ‘natural experiment’ - an event not under the control of the researchers, dividing people into exposed and unexposed groups. Data from approximately 30,000 people attending school around that time, (20) ---- MRI scans taken 46 years later, was available. The researchers examined the MRI scans, but they found no differences between those who attended school longer and those who did not. Ageing and is adverse effects were evident in all MRI measures; (21) ----, there was a noticeable reduction in total brain volume, cortical thickness, and surface area, as well as a decline in water diffusion quality.

17.
A) against
B) for
C) under
D) into
E) with

18.
A) in spite of
B) owing to
C) for the sake of
D) on behalf of
E) such as

19.
A) appropriate
B) conclusive
C) considerable
D) constant
E) proportional

20.
A) to have included
B) including
C) having been included
D) to include
E) included

21.
A) conversely
B) instead
C) for instance
D) otherwise
E) to this end

22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage.

A new study suggests that biases favouring the wealthy begin to emerge as early as 14 months. Even at this very young age, it is suggested that children (22) ---- to develop preferences based on social and economic status. Researchers note this preference may not stem from positive evaluations of richer individuals. (23) ----, it might be caused by a negative assessment of those with less. Taken together, these suggest that the development of wealth-based biases starts early in life. And once they come in, they become very strong. (24) ---- conducting a series of experiments, the team measured how children showed preferences toward people who had the desired resources, such as toys. (25) ---- showing a bias toward the wealthier person who had more resources, the children also showed dislike and avoidance for those who were labelled in the experiments as poorer. Together, the results (26) ---- the deep-seated ways that humans form ideas about what to value from a very early age.

22.
A) have to start
B) should have started
C) may start
D) had better start
E) would have started

23.
A) However
B) Otherwise
C) To sum up
D) For instance
E) Afterwards

24.
A) Without
B) Among
C) Over
D) By
E) Throughout

25.
A) In case of
B) In pursuit of
C) On behalf of
D) As opposed to
E) As well as

26.
A) indicate
B) overlook
C) convince
D) undermine
E) curb

27-36: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the given sentence.

27. Given that the brain constantly undergoes changes while children are growing up, ----.
A) it is known that immunotherapy has changed how we treat cancer even if it does not always work for brain tumours in kids
B) immunotherapy, which uses the body’s own immune system to help kill cancer cells, is a common method used in cancer patients
C) it could be one of the reasons why immunotherapy has had limited success in treating brain tumours in kids
D) immunotherapy makes use of substances made from living organisms to treat many different types of cancer
E) immunotherapy can prevent or slow cancer growth although cancer cells have ways to avoid destruction by the immune system

28. Recent research suggests ecosystem regrowth is not as beneficial as efforts to reduce fossil fuel emissions; ----.
A) so, this approach is the internal reorganization of energy mass stores, which affects transfers and transformations within the system
B) for instance, ecosystem strategy is a novel approach that helps enterprises build services to fulfil customers’ primary needs
C) therefore, effective ecosystem strategies can deliver valuable near-term benefits as well as generate long-term growth and resilience
D) to illustrate, an ecosystem approach helps sustain or restore ecological systems and their functions and values
E) however, it has the potential to successfully serve as a powerful complement in the fight against climate change

29. Since negative feedback, despite being difficult to accept, often provides the most invaluable learning opportunities ----.
A) teaching people to embrace negative feedback could greatly enhance learning outcomes in many fields
B) research suggests a lack of confidence in one’s performance plays a great role in determining the value of negative feedback for an individual
C) negative feedback can challenge people’s self-image and lead to feelings of inadequacy or failure
D) it is hardly surprising that feedback optimization has been the subject of intense investigation over the past decades
E) it is less clear how effective positive and negative feedback influence people when solving complicated issues

30. Although the primary cause of aphasia is stroke, particularly ischemic stroke, where blood flow to the brain is blocked, ----.
A) patients with this disorder may experience challenges in articulating words and forming sentences
B) the disorder can also stem from traumatic brain injury, brain tumours, and neurodegenerative diseases
C) people who engage in high-risk activities such as contact sports are generally more prone to aphasia
D) most aphasia cases involve a combination of these impairments, affecting multiple language functions
E) the incidence of aphasia is equal among men and women, though the condition is known to be age-dependent

31. While alchemy is often dismissed as fraud due to some of its eccentric objectives, such as seeking immortality or changing metals into gold, ----.
A) the word alchemy is derived from the Arabic al-kimiyya, which probably comes from the Greek language
B) it is described as the art of combining raw ingredients with matching effects to produce potions and poison
C) the first chemists were metallurgists, who were perhaps the most successful practitioners of the arts in antiquity
D) the experiments carried out by alchemists are credited with laying the foundations for modern science
E) neither in China nor in the West have scholars been able to precisely pinpoint the origins of alchemy

32. ----; nevertheless, it is still uncertain whether they are really beneficial and help us protect ourselves from diseases.
A) It is obvious that studies conducted in laboratories on spices do not necessarily translate into the human body
B) Research reveals that the consumption of some spices may have the potential to adversely affect the medications individuals take
C) Consuming more spicy foods than the body can tolerate may result in unpleasant symptoms, particularly gastrointestinal upset
D) Almost all spices are often claimed to have health benefits or even the ability to boost our immune system
E) In the culinary arts, a spice is any seed, fruit, root, bark, or other plant substance used primarily to flavour or colour foods

33. ----, the gap in educational achievement between different socioeconomic groups is likely to continue to grow.
A) As long as the majority of schools implement a variety of programs in order to support underprivileged students
B) Provided that governments increase funding for public education with the aim of addressing the inequalities in educational opportunities
C) Even though access to quality educational resources remains unequal across various communities
D) Since education is regarded as a key factor in promoting social mobility for people from various socioeconomic groups
E) Unless systemic barriers to equal access to educational opportunities, such as funding disparities, are efficiently dealt with

34. ----, social norms become deeply embedded in a community, and thus, they can be difficult to change.
A) Even if innovations often go through a phase of resistance before they are adopted
B) Whereas communities resist external pressures to alter traditional practices
C) Once behaviours and values are consistently reinforced across generations
D) If individuals question or challenge established societal expectations
E) Even though social norms help maintain order and cohesion within a society

35. ----; therefore, interventions tailored to their needs are crucial for promoting their social connectedness and overall wellbeing.
A) International students face unique challenges in adjusting to new environments, which can lead to feelings of loneliness and isolation
B) The major sources of stress experienced by international students are effectively dealt with in some educational institutions
C) Being an international student offers a wealth of advantages, including cultural exposure, personal growth, and enhanced career prospects
D) The benefits of living and learning in a new culture impact every aspect of your life, from the day you move to every day thereafter
E) Immersion into a new culture will stretch the language capabilities of some international students

36. Preventive healthcare can significantly reduce the burden of chronic diseases, ----.
A) even though early detection helps to address potential health issues
B) as long as individuals consistently adopt healthy lifestyle choices and undergo regular check-ups
C) just as access to preventive services is restricted in certain regions
D) whereas it requires a shift in the mindset toward proactive health management
E) unless many individuals focus on treating illnesses before they occur

37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in English, and the most accurate English translation of the sentences in Turkish.

37. Because technological advancement is accelerating and online communication is becoming part of our lives, providing children education about safe online use, rather than imposing bans, is a more effective way to protect them from potential harms.
A) Teknolojik gelişmelerin hızlanarak çevrimiçi iletişimde hayatın bir parçası haline geldiği günümüzde, çocuklara yasaklar koymak yerine güvenli çevrimiçi kullanım konusunda eğitim vermek, onları olası zararlardan korumak için daha etkili bir yol sunar.
B) Teknolojik gelişmeler hızlandıkça ve çevrimiçi iletişim hayatımızın bir parçası haline geldikçe, çocukların olası zararlardan korunması için yasaklar koymak değil; güvenli çevrimiçi kullanım hakkında eğitim vermek daha etkili bir yoldur.
C) Teknolojik gelişmeler hızlanmakta ve çevrimiçi iletişim hayatımızın bir parçası haline gelmekte olduğu için, çocuklara yasaklar koymaktan ziyade güvenli çevrimiçi kullanım hakkında eğitim vermek, onları olası zararlardan korumak için daha etkili bir yoldur.
D) Teknolojik gelişmeler hızlanıyor ve çevrimiçi iletişimin hayatımızın bir parçası haline geliyor olduğu için, çocuklara yasaklar koymaktansa güvenli çevrimiçi kullanım hakkında eğitim verilmesi, onları olası zararlardan korumada daha etkili bir yoldur.
E) Teknolojik gelişmelerin hızlanmasıyla çevrimiçi iletişim hayatımızın bir parçası haline geldiğinden, çocuklara yasaklar koyulmasından ziyade güvenli çevrimiçi kullanım hakkında eğitim verilmesi, onları olası zararlardan korumanın çok daha etkili bir yoludur.

38. Some political leaders may worsen public health by linking health policies to partisan identity contrary to expert advice, and thus, they undermine the role of expertise by ignoring approaches grounded in science.
A) Sağlık politikalarını uzman tavsiyelerine rağmen partizan kimlikle ilişkilendiren bazı siyasi liderler, halk sağlığını kötüleştirebilirler ve bilimsel temele dayanan yaklaşımları göz ardı ettiklerinden uzmanlık rolünü zayıflatırlar.
B) Bazı siyasi liderler, sağlık politikalarını uzman tavsiyelerinin aksine partizan kimlikle ilişkilendirerek halk sağlığını kötüleştirebilirler ve böylece bilimsel temele dayanan yaklaşımları göz ardı ederek uzmanlık rolünü zayıflatırlar.
C) Sağlık politikalarını uzman tavsiyelerinin aksine partizan kimlikle ilişkilendiren bazı siyasi liderler, bilimsel temele dayanan yaklaşımları göz ardı ederek uzmanlık rolünü zayıflatabilir ve böylece halk sağlığını kötüleştirebilirler.
D) Bazı siyasi liderler, sağlık politikalarını uzman tavsiyelerinden ziyade partizan kimlikle ilişkilendirdiklerinden, halk sağlığını kötüleştirebilirler ve bilimsel temele dayanan yaklaşımları göz ardı ederek uzmanlık rolünü zayıflatabilirler.
E) Bazı siyasi liderler, sağlık politikalarını uzman tavsiyeleri yerine partizan kimliğe bağlayarak bilimsel temelli yaklaşımları görmezden gelmekte ve uzmanlığın rolünü zayıflatarak halk sağlığını daha da kötüleştirmektedir.

39. Researchers believe that artificial intelligence is the future and that if more can be done with virtual trials to improve the effectiveness of clinical trials, this will help more patients to be able to survive cancer.
A) Araştırmacılar, yapay zekâda gelecek olduğuna ve klinik deneylerin etkinliğini artırmak için sanal deneylerle daha fazla şey yapıldığında, bunun daha fazla hastanın kanseri atlatmasına yardımcı olacağına inanıyorlar.
B) Araştırmacılar, yapay zekânın gelecek olduğuna inandıklarından, eğer klinik deneylerin etkinliğini artırmak için sanal deneylerle daha fazla şey yapabilirlerse, bunun daha fazla hastanın kanseri atlatmasına yardımcı olacağına inanıyorlar.
C) Araştırmacılar, yapay zekânın gelecek olduğuna ve klinik deneylerin etkinliğini artırmak için sanal deneylerle daha fazla şey yapılabilirse, bunun daha fazla hastanın kanseri atlatabilmesine yardımcı olacağına inanıyorlar.
D) Araştırmacılar, yapay zekânın gelecek olduğuna inanıyorlar ve eğer klinik deneylerin etkinliğini artırmak için sanal deneylerle daha fazla şey yapılırsa, bu daha fazla hastanın kanseri atlatmasına yardımcı olacak.
E) Araştırmacılar, yapay zekânın gelecek olduğuna ve klinik deneylerde etkinliği artırmak için sanal deneylerle daha fazla şey yapabilirlerse, bunun daha fazla hastanın kanseri atlatmasına yardımcı olacağına inanıyorlar.

40. Uzun zamandır var olan bir sosyal bilim teorisinin aksine, yeni araştırmalar, hayatınızda sizi başka sosyal çevrelere maruz bırakan kişilere sahip olmanın, daha bilinçli kalmanıza yardımcı olduğunu ortaya koyuyor.
A) New research suggests that having people in your life who expose you to other social circles helps you stay more informed, which is in contrast with a long-standing social science theory.
B) As opposed to a long-standing social science theory, new research suggests that being exposed to other social circles through the people in your life helps you stay more informed.
C) Having people in your life who expose you to other social circles helps you stay more informed, according to new research that contradicts a long-standing social science theory.
D) Contrary to a long-standing social science theory, new research suggests that having people in your life who expose you to other social circles helps you stay more informed.
E) In contrast to a long-standing social science theory, new research suggests that people in your life help you stay more informed by exposing you to other social circles.

41. Şehirlerde yaşayan insanların oranında bir artış olarak tanımlanan kentleşme, istihdama ve hizmetlere daha iyi erişim gibi sosyal değişimlere sebep olsa da, aynı zamanda trafik sıkışıklığı ve çevre sorunları gibi zorluklara da yol açar.
A) Even if urbanization, which is defined as an increase in the proportion of people living in cities, results in social and economic changes thanks to better access to employment and services, it also leads to some congestion and environmental issues.
B) Defined as an increase in the proportion of people living in cities, urbanization may result in social and economic changes such as better access to employment and services, but it may also lead to some challenges such as congestion and environmental issues.
C) Even though urbanization, defined as an increase in the proportion of people who live in cities, results in better access to employment and services through social and economic changes, it leads to challenges due to congestion and environmental issues.
D) Although urbanization, defined as an increase in the proportion of people living in cities, results in social and economic changes such as better access to employment and services, it also leads to challenges such as congestion and environmental issues.
E) Defined as an increase in the proportion of people living in cities, urbanization may lead to social and economic changes like having access to better employment and services, yet it can also lead to challenges such as congestion and environmental issues.

42. Edimsel koşullanma, davranışın sonuçlarından etkilendiği bir öğrenme teorisidir, örneğin, ödüllendirilen davranış muhtemelen tekrarlanırken, cezalandırılan davranış daha az sıklıkta meydana gelir.
A) Operant conditioning is a theory of learning where the consequences influence behaviour, for instance, behaviour that is rewarded is likely repeated, but behaviour that is punished occurs less frequently.
B) In operant conditioning, a theory of learning, behaviour is influenced by its consequences; for example, while behaviour that is rewarded is likely repeated, behaviour that is punished occurs less frequently.
C) Operant conditioning is a theory of learning where the consequences influence behaviour; for instance, if behaviour is rewarded, it is repeated, but if behaviour is punished, it occurs less frequently.
D) In operant conditioning, which is a theory of learning, behaviour is influenced by its consequences; to illustrate, behaviour that is rewarded is likely repeated, but behaviour that is punished occurs less frequently.
E) Operant conditioning is a theory of learning where behaviour is influenced by its consequences; for instance, while behaviour that is rewarded is likely repeated, behaviour that is punished occurs less frequently.

43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below.

As the field of medicine and laws have evolved since the early 1900s, the battle against misinformation has persisted. The American Medical Association (AMA) has been at the centre of this fight. In the early 1900s, the AMA formed a Bureau of Investigation to expose and combat medical fraud, or the promotion of unsubstantiated or deceitful health claims. It published articles, pamphlets, books and posters to help consumers separate fraud from legitimate information. Its staff also toured the country to give lectures and attend state fairs, and collaborated with government agencies like the Food and Drug Administration. They answered tens of thousands of letters from doctors and ordinary Americans who were looking for more information about a particular drug that they may have seen advertised in a magazine or newspaper. Yet medical fraud continues to exist in various forms, and the spread of misinformation during the COVID-19 pandemic is among the most notable examples. With so many unknowns as the illness spread across the US, misinformation about the potential of drugs like Hydroxychloroquine to combat COVID-19 spread rapidly on the internet and social media. Helping consumers separate sense from nonsense in health and medicine starts with education, and ideally, the strengthening of laws related to medical fraud, according to experts. Today, there are still diseases for which the medical community simply has not discovered cures, leading to despair among the public and the multi-billion-dollar pharmaceutical industry exploits that sense of fear. And as long as that gap is going to be there, there is going to be fraud.

43. Which of the following is not one of the things AMA did to deal with medical fraud?
A) It published printed materials to raise the awareness of the public about medical fraud.
B) It set up a particular institution with the aim of uncovering medical fraud.
C) It employed people who delivered speeches about medical fraud across the US.
D) It provided answers to questions that the average American citizen was seeking answers to.
E) It helped establish some government institutions like the Food and Drug Administration.

44. It can be understood from the passage that ----.
A) medical fraud still persists in spite of the efforts made by the AMA
B) the Food and Drug Administration has managed to prevent the rapid spread of misinformation
C) the AMA has benefitted from social media in its fight against medical fraud
D) ordinary American citizens have adopted a sceptical attitude towards the AMA
E) even some medical professionals are likely to contribute to the spread of misinformation

45. Which can be understood from the passage?
A) Drug companies capitalise on the sense of fear people have as there are still some incurable ailments.
B) The spread of misinformation about COVID-19 is a good example that highlights the need for other institutions that combat medical fraud.
C) Some medical professionals intentionally fuel public fear through social media platforms.
D) Medical fraud has heightened awareness of social media’s risks, such as spreading misinformation.
E) Some American citizens emphasise the importance of medical journals in the fight against medical fraud.

46. What is the author’s attitude towards medical fraud?
A) Sarcastic
B) Hopeful
C) Pessimistic
D) Indifferent
E) Tolerant

47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below.

Roman roads have long been admired for their durability and advanced construction techniques, playing an essential role in the expansion and governance of the Empire. They were more than mere routes; they were carefully designed and constructed pathways that connected cities, military outposts, and ports across thousands of miles. Their longevity is a testament to Roman engineering prowess, with many of these roads still intact today. The Romans employed a meticulous, multi-layered process to construct their roads, which provided both stability and durability. Roman engineers, known as agrimensores, first marked out the road route using tools which allowed for precise alignment and levelling. They aimed for direct paths, regardless of natural obstacles, which were either bridged or tunnelled through when possible. Once the path was marked, labourers would excavate a trench, which varied in depth depending on the terrain and intended use of the road. The trench was foundational, as it provided stability for the roads. Roman roads were constructed in multiple layers, each with specific materials and purposes to ensure stability and drainage. Several factors, like high-quality materials, layered structure, regular maintenance and strategic alignment contributed to the extraordinary durability of the roads. The time it took to build a road depended on several factors, like the terrain, available labour, and the urgency of the project. Generally, it could take several months to complete. However, in challenging terrains with obstacles like rivers or mountains, road construction would extend to several years. The Roman Empire employed a large workforce for road construction, including soldiers, local labourers, and slaves. Military engineers supervised the process to ensure a swift pace, as roads were critical for connecting new territories and securing the Empire’s borders.

47. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about Roman roads?
A) They continue to inspire modern infrastructure that contemporary engineers look up to.
B) Their construction was completed in a short time, regardless of the terrain conditions.
C) Their engineering marvel lies in their systematic approach to construction and durable materials.
D) Engineers avoided direct paths and preferred winding routes to make construction easier.
E) Most of them were abandoned after the fall of the Roman Empire and are no longer visible today.

48. It is clear from the passage that trenches ----.
A) were excavated to bridge and tunnel the roads that had particular strategic importance
B) served as a key element for the durability of the Roman roads
C) were evenly excavated before the construction of any road regardless of the natural obstacles
D) required the cooperation of a large labour force chosen specifically for the task
E) were regularly checked by the Roman engineers to speed up the road construction process

49. It is stated in the passage that Roman roads ----.
A) played an important part in both the growth and the domination of the Roman Empire
B) were constructed with the help of advanced tools that still remain unknown to science
C) took a long period of time to construct due to the meticulous processes they went through
D) were mainly built for strategic purposes rather than pathways that connected cities
E) were so remarkable in many aspects that they provided inspiration for succeeding empires

50. The primary purpose of the author is to ----.
A) illustrate different types of Roman engineers who contributed to the durability of the Roman roads
B) draw attention to the significance of the Roman roads for the expansion of the Roman Empire
C) prove that the Roman Empire was an advanced civilization by giving the roads as an example
D) emphasise the importance of trenches in the construction of durable Roman roads
E) elaborate on the thorough processes that enabled the Roman roads to defy time

51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below.

Trees that have protected ancient cities for hundreds of years are being burned, slashed and bulldozed to make way for housing and industrial agriculture. Deforestation is destroying archaeological sites really fast. That’s why archaeologists are in a race against time to discover the world’s lost ancient sites before they are destroyed. One of the latest discoveries was made by some archaeologists who were examining satellite images taken above Mexico. However, it was not initially apparent just how big the discovery was as they first thought they had discovered just one structure. But, in fact, it was a city. Named Valerina, the city is believed to have been home to thousands of people at its peak. Archaeologists predict that it contains nearly 6,500 structures. Technology is rapidly advancing the capabilities of archaeologists to locate forgotten ruins in hard-to-reach locations. As remote sensing technology improves, archaeologists have realized that it has been the forest that has protected these ruins for so long by making them hard to access. Therefore, there is a sense of urgency about mapping these areas before the forest is destroyed and more archaeological heritage is lost forever. On the one hand, technologies allow archaeologists to map larger areas, but, on the other hand, the areas they can hope to map is shrinking due mainly to deforestation. While mapping ancient sites is key to their protection, each discovery also takes humankind closer to an age where every inch of the planet has been explored. Childhood dreams of exploring jungles and stumbling upon an ancient world will be no more.

51. Which can be inferred from the passage?
A) technological breakthroughs have the potential to halt deforestation and protect archaeological sites
B) archaeologists generally inflict serious damage on nature for the sake of new discoveries
C) deforestation is making it easier for archaeologists to discover once-hidden archaeological treasures
D) the satellite images archaeologists used clearly showed that the ancient city they found was huge
E) archaeologists are rushing in order to discover archaeological sites before they are lost for good

52. It can be understood from the passage that ----.
A) mapping ancient sites is still a challenge for archaeologists despite various innovative technologies
B) some archaeologists believe that one way of preserving ancient sites is to enhance current technological tools
C) deforestation is contributing to the destruction of valuable archaeological sites at an accelerating rate
D) archaeologists often experience tremendous challenges in discovering ancient sites due to the dense forests in some regions
E) humankind has always been fascinated by ancient sites due to the invaluable insights they may provide

53. One can conclude from the passage that ----.
A) Archaeological discoveries sometimes have to be made at the expense of the loss of densely forested areas.
B) The ancient city of Valerina was discovered completely by chance while searching for an ancient lost city.
C) The use of satellite images for the purpose of locating ancient sites has made the conventional approaches used by archaeologists obsolete.
D) Forests have contributed to the preservation of some ancient sites that are waiting to be discovered.
E) Remote sensing technology has made it apparent that there are more archaeological sites to be discovered than previously thought.

54. What is the primary purpose of the author?
A) To highlight the urgency of locating and preserving ancient sites due to the risk deforestation poses to their existence
B) To illustrate the recent methods that archaeologists benefit from in the analysis of ancient ruins located in jungles
C) To argue that innovative technological tools are likely to uncover every ancient city all over the world
D) To suggest that exploring and discovering new archaeological sites has lost its appeal due to technology
E) To emphasise the important role technological tools play in locating hidden, undiscovered ancient sites

55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below.

Marine fossils found in a Neanderthal cave in northern Spain suggest that extinct hominids may have shared modern humans’ habit of collecting items, just as people today collect baseball cards and souvenirs. The practice of collecting may seem like a pretty basic behaviour, but, it is in fact, indicative of advanced cognition since it requires attributing symbolic meanings to things. The extent to which Neanderthals were capable of such abstract thought remains a topic of debate, although mounting evidence hints at their surprisingly complex imaginations. For instance, researchers point out that these ancient species produced art, cared for the elderly and disabled, and may even have developed religious practices. In most cases, these consist of just one or two items, which can be understood as evidence of an artistic interest or curiosity for the forms of nature. Dated to between 39,800 and 54,600 years ago, the compilation of fossils comes from a time and place with no known Homo sapiens presence, which suggests that collecting activities and the associated abstract thinking were present in Neanderthals before the arrival of modern humans. However, there is debate over who collected them and why. Despite having no solid answer to this question, researchers speculate that they might have been collected by children as this is seen as a characteristic of childhood. Researchers believe the Neanderthal groups gathered and collected fossils, just as we look for fossils. This seems to become an infinite spiral through which, at some point, we will be part of what we collect.

55. It can be understood from the passage that ----.
A) the practice of collecting objects was common among early human species apart from Neanderthals
B) many behavioural patterns of Neanderthal children bear striking resemblances with those of modern-day children
C) the first contact between Neanderthals and modern humans might have had a profound influence on the cognitive skills of Neanderthals
D) the fossils found in the cave were deliberately arranged in certain patterns to convey messages or stories to future generations
E) the collection of stuff is a sign of advanced mental capabilities of Neanderthals although it is seen as a basic behaviour

56. Researchers believe the fossils they found in the cave in Northern Spain indicate that ----.
A) Neanderthals might have developed a fascination with the forms of nature
B) abstract thinking, such as the activity of collecting, only appeared with the arrival of Homo sapiens
C) Neanderthals may have inherited the practice of collecting items from earlier human species
D) symbolism played a part in the development of a habit of collecting objects during childhood
E) Neanderthals would use the fossils they gathered for ornamental purposes

57. Which can be inferred from the passage?
A) Neanderthal children were involved in the process of taking care of the elderly and the disabled, for whom they collected memorabilia.
B) Mounting evidence reveals that collecting items contributed to the development of the mental faculties of Neanderthals.
C) The reason why fossils were gathered and by whom they were collected is still uncertain, though it is possible that it was Neanderthal children.
D) Neanderthals might have developed artistic skills as the fossils they collected indicate some modifications.
E) Researchers believe Neanderthals preserved and left the fossils in a cave so that future generations would discover them.

58. The author of the passage believes that ----.
A) the objects Neanderthals used to collect must be analysed thoroughly to understand the extent of their cognitive skills
B) the recent discovery in a cave in Spain should be considered a landmark in the history of archaeology
C) Neanderthals could not have been the first human species that developed advanced abstract thinking skills
D) the fossils we leave behind will be discovered by future generations, just as those belonging to the earlier humans we have found
E) it was Neanderthal children who gathered marine fossils although researchers do not have compelling evidence

59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below.

There is nowhere on Earth quite like the Atacama Desert. It exists in a unique meteorological void, making it almost devoid of water and home to almost no life. But almost no life is not the same thing as no life. And increasingly, science is turning to more bizarre and hidden organisms that inhabit this super-arid environment. Discovering them is extremely tricky, though. This is because, in the Atacama, separating life from the lifeless is often too difficult. However, a new study may have found the solution. In the study, the Atacama soil was put in a tube of cold liquid and shaken a bit; the resulting dirty liquid was emptied out, and then the process was repeated. After four rounds, nearly all of the traces of DNA that belonged to some microorganisms were found in liquid as well as in the leftover soil sample. The findings underscore the significance of utilizing alternative techniques in low-biomass environments where traditional DNA-based analyses may not be feasible. The results also demonstrate the viability of the proposed study framework. The Atacama is sometimes referred to as Mars on Earth thanks to its extreme aridity, its specific soil type, and UV radiation levels higher than anywhere else on the planet. It has been used by researchers as a model for the red planet for 20 years. The subsurface of Mars is often proposed to be a habitat for microorganisms, and this is what we exactly see in the Atacama. There are also many other similarities that hint towards the potential for life on Mars.

59. It can be understood from the passage that ----.
A) the method that the researchers have come up with still has many flaws, making it difficult to discover microorganisms inhabiting the Atacama
B) it is virtually impossible for any microorganisms to inhabit Mars owing to the extreme conditions present on the planet
C) the researchers will make use of the novel approach to prove the existence of the traces of ancient DNA that may be found on other planets
D) the researchers have been working on the Atacama for two decades to identify the potential of life on Mars
E) the traditional DNA-based analyses can work on other planets by contrast with the findings of previous studies

60. The researchers have chosen the Atacama to carry out their study because ----.
A) they want to create an environment in the Atacama that is similar to the conditions on Mars
B) the Atacama bears a number of resemblances to the planet Mars
C) they are aiming to find the traces of ancient life forms in the Atacama
D) the microorganisms found in the Atacama must be identical to those thought to exist in Mars
E) they wanted to find out which microorganisms have the potential to endure the harsh conditions in the Atacama

61. Which of the following is not one of the findings of the study carried out in the Atacama?
A) There are microorganisms inhabiting the Atacama despite its super-arid environment.
B) Using different methods is vital to finding the potential for life in supposedly uninhabitable environments.
C) Utilizing conventional DNA-based analyses does not yield positive outcomes in certain environments.
D) The novel approach the researchers have come up with has proven feasible.
E) Finding life on the subsurface of Mars seems to be more demanding than the researchers previously assumed.

62. What does the passage mainly discuss?
A) An innovative method used in the Atacama to detect microorganisms in extreme environments, with implications for discovering life on Mars
B) The recent study proving that the Atacama Desert is an exact replica of Mars, making it irrelevant for further research
C) The study focusing on how extreme aridity impacts the survival of organisms in environments like the Atacama
D) The confirmation that the Atacama is a lifeless region, suggesting the absence of microorganisms in extreme environments
E) The conclusion that no viable DNA-based methods can be used in low-biomass environments like the Atacama

63-67: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the dialogue.

63.
Emma: Did you know that the Chinese Mid-Autumn Festival is coming up soon?
Ethan: Oh yeah, I’ve heard about it! Isn’t that the one with the mooncakes?
Emma: Yeah, mooncakes are a big part of it and it is one of the most important traditional festivals in Chinese culture.
Ethan: ----
Emma: In Chinese culture, it symbolizes unity and completeness. Families gather under the full moon to spend time together, eat special foods like mooncakes, and enjoy each other’s company.
Ethan: So, it’s kind of like Thanksgiving, but with a focus on the moon.

A) It’s such a fascinating story! So, is that why people eat mooncakes?
B) That’s a bit strange. So, what’s the story behind the festival?
C) That sounds really meaningful. Why is the full moon so significant?
D) That’s interesting. Do other cultures have similar celebrations?
E) They’re delicious! Have you ever joined the festival yourself?

64.
Jake: The new AI-powered language translation technology is revolutionary.
Lilly: I know and unlike the older systems that mostly relied on word-to-word translations, this new technology uses advanced neural networks to understand the context and nuances of entire sentences.
Jake: ----
Lilly: Exactly. For example, if you tried to translate a phrase like “it’s raining cats and dogs” with older tools, you’d probably get something literal and weird. But this new system understands the cultural meaning behind the phrase and translates it correctly into something like “it’s pouring heavily” in other languages.

A) So, I guess this means it can handle things like idioms and slang better.
B) That’s a game-changer. I imagine this could be really useful for businesses.
C) It sounds like it’s bridging a lot of gaps, but I’m sure there are downsides to it.
D) It can make education more accessible to students from different linguistic backgrounds.
E) It sounds great, but I’m sure there will always be a need for human touch as well.

65.
Alex: I’ve been really worried about the workload lately. It feels like it’s been piling up way too much, and I’m finding it hard to keep up.
Sarah: It seems like everyone’s been exhausted these past few weeks. It’s frustrating, and it feels like there’s no breathing room to focus on the quality of the work.
Alex: ----
Sarah: I think we should. We could suggest specific ways to tackle the workload better.
Alex: That’s a good idea. Like prioritizing tasks more effectively or even hiring additional staff for certain projects.

A) Sometimes it feels like the management doesn’t take into account how long a task actually takes.
B) The problem is that we don’t always have realistic deadlines.
C) Maybe we could bring up the issue at our regular meetings.
D) Just saying that we’re overwhelmed might not lead to actionable solutions.
E) The management won’t listen unless we approach it professionally and focus on solutions.

66.
Liam: NASA has discovered another distant exoplanet called K2-18b, which is about 124 light-years away.
Mia: And, as far as I remember, scientists have detected water vapour in its atmosphere.
Liam: ----
Mia: As it’s still being studied, they don’t know for sure yet. The planet is in the “habitable zone” of its star, which means it’s at the right distance to have liquid water on its surface.

A) The idea of finding another planet that is so far away from us is mind-blowing.
B) So, the planet has the potential to sustain life, then.
C) Some researchers think it could have a thick hydrogen-rich atmosphere.
D) It’s discoveries like this remind us of the infinite possibilities out there.
E) Space exploration really makes you realize how tiny we are in the grand scheme of things.

67.
Samuel: I’ve just read about a rare disease called progeria. It’s a genetic disorder that causes children to age rapidly, starting in their first couple of years of life.
Jean: ----
Samuel: They usually develop symptoms of ageing like hair loss, wrinkled skin, and stiff joints at a very young age. And unfortunately, most of them don’t live past their teenage years because of heart problems or strokes.
Jean: That’s really heartbreaking. I hope scientists will find a cure in the near future.

A) Do you know whether there is a cure for this devastating disorder?
B) Can you imagine how tough it must be for their families?
C) That sounds terrifying. How does that even happen?
D) As far as I know, it’s also called Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome, isn’t it?
E) So, what are the indicators of the condition from which kids suffer?

68-71: For these questions, choose the best rephrased form of the given sentence.

68. Since cardiovascular disease is a primary cause of mortality in older individuals, it is not too surprising that a reduction in the underlying risk factors could lead to a decrease in cardiovascular mortality.
A) Given that the elderly are vulnerable to cardiovascular diseases; it is hardly surprising that the mortality rates stemming from the disease would decline significantly if the major risk factors causing the disease could be diminished.
B) Cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of death among the elderly; therefore, it is not unexpected that diminishing the key risk factors could result in a decline in cardiovascular mortality.
C) As long as older individuals can reduce the primary risks that may cause cardiovascular disease, it is almost certain that they will not suffer from high mortality rates that result from this condition.
D) In order to avoid high mortality rates resulting from cardiovascular disease, older individuals need to eliminate the primary risks that lead to the development of the condition.
E) Cardiovascular disease is one of the most common conditions in the elderly; thus, it is obvious that the major risks must be eliminated to diminish the mortality rates caused by cardiovascular mortality.

69. Mounting evidence shows that people who are very environmentally aware are more likely to experience guilt when they fail to meet their own environmental standards.
A) Increasing evidence reveals that when people become more aware of environmental standards, they tend to put the blame on themselves more often than others for failing to comply with them.
B) Mounting evidence shows that if individuals fail to meet their own environmental standards, they experience the feeling of guilt, which leads them to become more conscious of the environment.
C) Increasing evidence shows that once people start suffering from the feeling of guilt for failing to live up to their own environmental standards, they are likely to become more environmentally conscious.
D) Mounting evidence shows that the more environmentally conscious people become, the less likely they are to blame themselves for not meeting their own environmental standards.
E) Increasing evidence suggests that once people who are highly conscious of the environment do not meet their own environmental expectations, they become more prone to feeling guilty.

70. A recent report calls for an urgent shift in how the world grows food and uses land to avoid irreversibly compromising Earth’s capacity to support human and environmental well-being.
A) A recent report has warned that the way food is produced globally and the way land is used should change dramatically, because the Earth’s capacity to maintain human health and environmental well-being is at stake.
B) A recent report points out that the decline in Earth’s ability to maintain human life and ecological well-being cannot be prevented as long as the current practices of global food production and land use remain unchanged.
C) A recent report outlines the need for a critical shift in the way global food is produced and the way land is used to prevent irreversible damage to Earth’s ability to sustain human life and ecological health.
D) Unless the ways global food is produced and land is used are changed, the Earth’s capacity to support human health and environmental well-being may be irreversibly compromised, according to a recent report.
E) Although the current practices of global food production and land use harm Earth’s capacity to sustain human life and environmental well-being, this can be prevented by taking some urgent measures, according to a recent report.

71. Facilitated by technological and trade advancements, globalisation is the process of growing interconnection among economies, cultures, and societies, creating global opportunities, but it poses some challenges as well.
A) Although globalisation, the process of increasing connectedness among economies, cultures, and societies thanks to the improvements in technology and trade, presents certain difficulties, it also creates worldwide prospects.
B) Improvements in trade have quickened the process of global connectedness among economies, cultures, and societies, yet it has also posed some risks due to technological developments.
C) Since globalisation has made it increasingly easier to connect economies, societies, and cultures with the improvements in trade and technology, it is no surprise that there are some challenges as well.
D) Much as globalisation, the process of increasing connectedness among economies, cultures, and societies, has created worldwide prospects, improvements in technology and trade must be made to deal with the challenges it may lead to.
E) Even though globalisation has fostered the interconnectedness among economies, cultures, and societies thanks to the improvements in trade and technology, there are still many challenges it has inevitably brought.

72-75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the passage.

72. While it is possible for a person to develop a phobia of anything from beards to flowers, the vast majority of terror is reserved for dangerous-looking animals, particularly snakes and spiders, as well as heights, deep water, and needles. ---- This is because venomous creatures, falls, oceans, and sharp objects have been claiming lives since the beginning of humanity. However, while a certain level of respect for all these fears is healthy, phobias represent a pathological level of anxiety that significantly impacts a person’s quality of life. Yet, while panic over encountering a tiny spider may seem ridiculous to some, research suggests that our brains may be hardwired to obsess over certain animals.
A) These more unusual phobias stem from influential life experiences, becoming ingrained via learning pathways.
B) It might sometimes be difficult to figure out the exact reasons why such phobias have existed throughout time.
C) Phobias, on the other hand, are irrational fears that, at their worst, prevent people from engaging in everyday life.
D) From an evolutionary perspective, such fears play a vital role in helping us identify danger and steer clear of potentially life-threatening situations.
E) Unlike regular anxiety, then, the intense panic triggered by these sometimes-baseless terrors seems so unnecessary.

73. Superstitions are, by definition, an irrational attitude of mind, a belief, action, or practice that has no basis in fact yet is treated as legitimate conduct. Yet nearly all of us have them. They come in all shapes and sizes according to the recent research carried out throughout the United States. In hockey, for instance, players refuse to shave during playoffs at least as long as their team is winning. ---- And in fact, they may even reject the idea that they have supernatural beliefs. And being superstitious is prevalent even among self-declared atheists.
A) Research shows people are more likely to display superstitious behaviour under certain conditions.
B) In other areas of life, superstitions are present though people deny being superstitious.
C) A key element of superstition is the expectation of supernatural consequences of one’s actions.
D) Superstitious beliefs and behaviours are all aimed at managing supernatural reward and punishment.
E) These unfounded beliefs have been persisting since ancient times.

74. Throughout history, homo sapiens coexisted with other human species and they interbred with their Neanderthal and Denisovan relatives. ---- Thanks to recent developments in ancient DNA detection and genome sequencing, scientists now understand how this primitive genetic mix continues to shape our health, appearance, and physiology. As Homo sapiens migrated out of Africa in waves, different populations ended up mating with Neanderthals in different regions. As a result, modern humans display a complex patchwork of genetic sequences inherited from their ancestors.
A) Many millennia have passed, yet we still bear the consequences of our predecessors’ mating behaviours.
B) Such discoveries have helped to unravel the genetic history of our species, yet many gaps remain.
C) It is still unclear how gene flow between different human species impacts our DNA.
D) Homo sapiens may have introduced diseases that were impossible for other species to survive.
E) All non-African individuals now derive around two per cent of their genome from Neanderthals.

75. Humans use an enormous amount of energy, more than 180,000 terawatt hours per year. Currently, a little more than 11,000 of those terawatt hours come from hydropower. But it could be a lot more than that. Sea waves are a very promising energy carrier among renewable power sources, since they are able to manifest an enormous amount of energy resources in almost all geographical regions. ---- Owing to the Earth’s various climate systems and cycles, waves are more powerful within the northern and southern temperate zones, the latitudes roughly lining up with the UK, Alaska, and Hudson Bay in the north, and the southern tip of Chile and Argentina in the south. Waves are also far more powerful out in the open ocean than closer to shore, on account of their longer wavelengths and larger sizes.
A) Renewable energy can be scarce, and other available power sources are expensive and highly polluting.
B) We can harness wave power via some heavy-duty machinery, perhaps fixed into the ocean bed.
C) Wave power, of course, is not evenly spread throughout the globe.
D) It is highly unlikely that we could ever make the oceans a 100 per cent efficient power source.
E) Wave energy is expected to catch on in some areas that are currently underserved by other power sources.

76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant sentence in the passage.

76. (I) Youth in America are experiencing a mental health crisis, according to the Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, which reports rising cases of hopelessness, depression, anxiety, and self-harm among students. (II) One thing known to improve mental health among students is increased school connectedness when students feel that the adults and peers in their school care about them as individuals in addition to their learning ability. (III) Another challenge is that many administrators and families still do not realize the fact that social workers are trained to provide mental health services. (IV) Schools are working to improve their connectedness by adding social workers to their staff in order to help address the mental health concerns of students. (V) However, many individual schools and districts are struggling with the best way to deploy these valuable resources so that students can benefit from their care.
A) I
B) II
C) III
D) IV
E) V

77. (I) The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has the mission to oversee the safety of the US food supply, setting requirements for nutrition labelling, and responding to outbreaks of foodborne illness. (II) But when it comes to additives already in our food and the safety of certain ingredients, the FDA is not willing to take any initiative to protect us, according to a new study. (III) The current FDA process allows the food companies to regulate themselves when it comes to thousands of added ingredients, and deciding on their own whether or not to disclose the use of ingredients and the underlying safety data to the FDA. (IV) Since 1958, the FDA has been responsible for evaluating the safety of new chemicals and substances added to foods before they go to market. (V) As a result, many new substances have been added to our food supply without any government oversight.
A) I
B) II
C) III
D) IV
E) V

78. (I) Reading is a fundamental aspect of learning as it allows individuals to absorb information at their own pace, revisit complex concepts, and build a strong theoretical foundation. (II) Looking at or saying words in a passage without gathering their meaning is considered ineffective reading because it will prevent you from understanding or applying the ideas. (III) Through reading, learners engage with various perspectives and ideas, and thus they have the potential to expand their knowledge. (IV) This self-paced exploration is crucial for developing a deep understanding of subjects, as it allows learners to process information in a structured and detailed manner. (V) Moreover, reading enhances vocabulary, improves comprehension skills, and fosters critical thinking, making it an indispensable part of the learning process.
A) I
B) II
C) III
D) IV
E) V

79. (I) A vegan diet can be high in iron, but iron from plant-based food is absorbed by the body less well than iron from meat. (II) One of the most common reasons to avoid steak and stilton and go vegan is because of the health benefits they promise. (III) The vegan diet is generally considered to be higher in fibre and lower in cholesterol, protein, calcium and salt than an omnivorous diet, but there are still worries around cutting meat, fish, eggs and dairy completely from our diets. (IV) One common concern is whether a vegan diet provides enough vitamin B12, which is found in meat, fish, eggs and dairy, but not in fruit or vegetables. (V) Therefore, it is recommended that vegans consume 1.5 micrograms of the vitamin daily.
A) I
B) II
C) III
D) IV
E) V

80. (I) Thousands of motorists have been caught using their phone and not wearing seat belts after the launch of new AI cameras. (II) Images captured by the cameras show drivers holding mobile phones while behind the wheel, sometimes with children in their vehicles. (III) On the other hand, there are some concerns that this system will pose a risk to people’s privacy. (IV) In several cases, the cameras also found child passengers not being securely fastened in their seats, or not wearing seat belts at all. (V) The results highlight the troubling reality that many drivers still do not consider how their behavior impacts themselves, their passengers, and others on the road.
A) I
B) II
C) III
D) IV
E) V

1.	C	21.	C	41.	D	61.	E
2.	B	22.	C	42.	E	62.	A
3.	D	23.	A	43.	E	63.	C
4.	A	24.	D	44.	A	64.	A
5.	C	25.	E	45.	A	65.	C
6.	E	26.	A	46.	C	66.	B
7.	C	27.	C	47.	C	67.	E
8.	A	28.	E	48.	B	68.	B
9.	B	29.	A	49.	A	69.	E
10.	B	30.	B	50.	E	70.	C
11.	C	31.	D	51.	D	71.	A
12.	C	32.	D	52.	E	72.	D
13.	D	33.	E	53.	C	73.	B
14.	B	34.	C	54.	A	74.	A
15.	D	35.	A	55.	E	75.	C
16.	C	36.	B	56.	A	76.	C
17.	A	37.	C	57.	C	77.	D
18.	E	38.	B	58.	D	78.	B
19.	D	39.	C	59.	D	79.	A
20.	B	40.	D	60.	B	80.	C
